The Project Gutenberg eBook, A guide, descriptive and historical, through
the Town of Shrewsbury, by William Allport Leighton


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: A guide, descriptive and historical, through the Town of Shrewsbury


Author: William Allport Leighton



Release Date: July 18, 2020  [eBook #62688]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A GUIDE, DESCRIPTIVE AND
HISTORICAL, THROUGH THE TOWN OF SHREWSBURY***


Transcribed from the John Davies, Fourth Edition (1855) by David Price,
email ccx074@pglaf.org

                          [Picture: Book cover]





                                 A GUIDE,
                       DESCRIPTIVE AND HISTORICAL,
                               THROUGH THE
                           TOWN OF SHREWSBURY,


               INTERSPERSED WITH BRIEF NOTICES OF THE MORE

                   REMARKABLE OBJECTS IN THE ENVIRONS,

                     TO WHICH ARE APPENDED, LISTS OF
                     THE EMINENT NATIVES OF THE TOWN,
                  WITH REFERENCES TO BIOGRAPHICAL WORKS;

                                    OF
                   THE BIRDS SEEN IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD;

                                  AND OF
                       THE RARER SPECIES OF PLANTS
                       INDIGENOUS TO THE VICINITY.

                                  BY THE
                   REV. W. A. LEIGHTON, B.A.  F.B S.E.
                  AUTHOR OF “A FLORA OF SHROPSHIRE,” &c.

                                * * * * *

    “I held on way to auncient Shrewsebrie towne,
    And so from horse at lodging lighting downe,
    I walkt the streats, and markt what came to vewe.”

                                                               CHURCHYARD.

                                  * * * * *

                             FOURTH EDITION.
              Illustrated with Sixty=one Engravings on Wood.

                                * * * * *

                               SHREWSBURY:
                PUBLISHED BY JOHN DAVIES, XV. HIGH STREET.
                         SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.

                                * * * * *

    “Without aiming to be great—we aspire only to be useful.”

                                   _Dr. Butler’s Inaugural Address_, 1835.




LIST OF ENGRAVINGS.

                                                          PAGE.
     1  Organ Screen in St. Mary’s Church                     1
     2  Norman Doorway, ditto                                 1
     3  Town Hall                                             7
     4  Market House                                          9
     5  Statue of Richard Duke of York, on ditto             10
     6  Angel under canopied niche, on ditto                 10
     7  Public Rooms                                         12
     8  Ireland’s Mansion                                    14
     9  “Bennette’s Halle”                                   15
    10  Timber Houses on Pride Hill                          16
    11  Gateway of the Council House                         19
    12  Ditto of the Castle                                  22
    13  The Castle                                           23
    14  Laura’s Tower                                        24
    15  Royal Free Grammar School                            27
    16  Principal School-Room, ditto                         43
    17  Bible Stand in the Chapel, ditto                     44
    18  The Library, ditto                                   45
    19  Railway Station                                      48
    20  Berwick Chapel                                       53
    21  St. Michael’s Church                                 54
    22  Battlefield Church                                   56
    23  St. Mary’s Church                                    62
    24  Monument to Rev. J. B. Blakeway, in ditto            72
    25  Triple Lancet Window, ditto                          74
    26  Ancient Stone Font, ditto                            76
    27  Monument to Admiral Benbow, ditto                    77
    28  Altar-tomb, Simon de Leybourne, ditto                79
    29  Monument to Master Wigram, ditto                     79
    30  Statue to Bishop Butler, ditto                       81
    31  Salop Infirmary                                      86
    32  St. Alkmund’s Church                                 94
    33  Guild House of the Holy Cross                        99
    34  St. Julian’s Church                                 100
    35  Old St. Chad’s Church                               107
    36  Tower on the Town Walls                             119
    37  English Bridge                                      122
    38  Abbey Church, or Church of the Holy Cross           130
    39  Ditto, eastern end                                  133
    40  Stone Railing, in ditto                             134
    41  Monument to Roger de Montgomery, ditto              136
    42  Altar-tomb to Richard Onslow, Esq. ditto            137
    43  Ditto to Alderman Jones and his Wife, ditto         138
    44  Reader’s Pulpit, ditto                              141
    45  White Hall                                          145
    46  Column in honour of Lord Hill                       147
    47  St. Giles’s Church                                  148
    48  Interior of ditto                                   151
    49  “Pest-Basin,” in St. Giles’s Churchyard             152
    50  Altar-tomb at Longner                               155
    51  Roman Wall at Wroxeter                              155
    52  Trinity Church                                      156
    53  Meole Bridge, &c.                                   157
    54  Window in Franciscan Friary                         158
    55  The Quarry                                          159
    56  St. Chad’s Church                                   163
    57  Font in ditto                                       165
    58  Figure of St. Chad in ditto                         167
    59  Welsh Bridge                                        171
    60  St. George’s Church                                 173
    61  Shelton Oak                                         176

                                * * * * *

_August_, 1855.




SHREWSBURY.


SHREWSBURY, the capital town of Shropshire, lies nearly in the centre of
that fertile county, and occupies a commanding eminence which gradually
rises from the bed of the river Severn, whose stream gracefully bends its
course around three sides of the town, thus forming a peninsula, having
its narrow isthmus towards the north-east.  From whatever point the
traveller approaches, his mind cannot fail of being forcibly impressed
with the singular beauty of its situation and general aspect;—its dark
and frowning castle, the elegant towers and gracefully tapering spires of
its ecclesiastical structures; the undulating, irregular, yet picturesque
disposition of its buildings, and above all, the beautiful windings of
“Severn’s ambient wave;”—all combine to form a prospect surpassed by none
and equalled but by few other towns of our island.

               [Picture: Organ Screen in St. Mary’s Church]

From the gradual and progressive improvements of civilization, the
present condition of the town presents few points of resemblance to the
appearance indicated in its original Saxon name, Scrobbesbyrig, _the
fenced eminence overgrown with shrubs_; a dense population of more than
20,000 inhabitants {2} now dwelling within its extent, busily engaged in
the manufactures of linen, thread, iron, brawn, &c.—not forgetting those
far-famed cakes

    “Whose honour’d name th’ inventive city own,
    Rendering thro’ Britain’s isle Salopia’s praises known.”

               [Picture: Norman Doorway, St. Mary’s Church]

Its earliest history, like that of most other ancient places, remains
involved in obscurity; though it is now the generally received opinion,
that the town was founded by the Britons, who, expelled from the adjacent
station of Uriconium, or Wroxeter, which they continued to inhabit after
the final departure of their Roman masters, sought here that refuge
against their Saxon enemies which the then nature of the country was so
well capable of affording them.  During the progress of succeeding ages,
our town and its inhabitants, have, of course, by turns flourished amid
the calm prosperity of peace, and trembled at the terrors and desolations
of overwhelming warfare.  But the ample details of its important history
are totally foreign to the purpose of the present manual; the highest aim
of which, is to furnish to the intelligent and inquisitive traveller, a
faithful, though humble guide, in conducting him, in his survey of the
place, to those objects which, from general or local circumstances, are
most deserving his attention and observation. {3}

To all classes, in their various and varied pursuits, our town will be
found replete with matter of interest and instruction.  The refined
traveller will here meet with customs and manners peculiar, singular, and
interesting—the artist, subjects for his pencil and exercise for his
judgment, in imitating the tints and stains of time and nature’s
never-ceasing powers—the historical antiquary will, with enthusiastic
delight, trace its connexion with many of the grandest features of our
national history—the architectural antiquary will find ample scope for
many an hour’s delightful meditation on the massive grandeur of the
“oulden time”—whilst to the scrutinising eye of the naturalist, the
vicinity will, at every step, unfold objects of beauteous and wondrous
design, which will uplift his enraptured mind, as he fondly gazes on
them, in heartfelt gratitude, adoration, and praise, to the bounteous
Giver of all good.

Commencing then at the centre, let us first survey that emporium of civic
honour,



THE TOWN HALL.


The ancient Guild Hall was a large, low, timber structure, with a high
clock-turret, erected in the reign of Henry VIII. and stood across the
Market Square, nearly at right angles to the centre of the New Hall.  The
lower part consisted of shops, and a covered way for carriages
communicating with the High Street.  The upper story contained the rooms
in which the business of the town was transacted, and the assizes held.
The Exchequer, in which the municipal records were preserved, stood on
the south-east side, and was a strong square stone tower of three
stories, erected in 1490.

This incommodious building was in 1783 levelled with the ground, and a
new hall erected in its place, after the design of the late Mr. Haycock
of this town, at an expense of £11,000, and opened for public business on
17th March, 1786.  In excavating the foundations, considerable deposits
of what was apparently manure were discovered, indicating, in all
probability, the existence of a farm-yard on the spot, at some very early
period.  The new structure exhibited a handsome stone front towards the
Market Square, and consisted of a spacious vestibule, and two not very
convenient courts for the assizes, on the ground floor.  A large assembly
room, grand jury room, and spacious offices for the business of the town
and county, occupied the upper story, to which an elegant spiral
staircase of stone led from the vestibule below.

Considerable sinkings having in 1832 been observed in different parts of
the structure in consequence of the instability of the foundations, the
building was surveyed by eminent and experienced architects, and
pronounced unsafe and dangerous.  The matter was immediately deliberated
upon by the proper authorities, and after due investigation, it was
determined to take down the whole edifice and erect a more commodious one
on its site.  For the double purpose of obtaining a more eligible
foundation, and of adding a considerable additional space in front to the
Market Square, some adjoining premises were purchased by subscription,
and a substantial structure, well adapted for all the purposes of the
business to be therein transacted, was, in 1837, completed by Messrs.
Birch, of this town, after a design by Sir Richard Smirke.  The cost of
this building was about £13,000, and was raised by a county-rate.

The disposition of the interior embraces on the ground floor, a
vestibule, affording a communication with rooms on either side for the
mayor, counsel at the assizes, and witnesses, and beyond with two
spacious courts and robing rooms for the judges.  On the second floor are
arranged the clerk of the indictments, grand jury and witnesses
attendance rooms; and on the upper floor, the town clerk’s and clerk of
the peace’s offices, and a great room, 45 feet by 32 feet, for general
purposes; on this floor are also fire-proof chambers for the safe
preservation of the municipal records.  Under the crown court are cells,
&c. for the prisoners, and a room for the deliberations of juries.  Its
exterior elevation is here represented:—

                           [Picture: Town Hall]

The following pictures, presented at various times to the Corporation,
adorn the walls of the Town Hall: Charles I.; Charles II.; William III.;
George I.; George II.; George III. and his Queen Charlotte; Admiral
Benbow; Lord Hill, by Sir William Beechy; and Admiral Owen, painted by
our townsman, R. Evans, Esq. R.A. by subscription.  An excellent likeness
of The Honourable Thomas Kenyon, late Chairman of Salop Quarter Sessions,
and various other local portraits, are arranged around.

The Norman Earls of Shrewsbury, to whom the town belonged after the
Conquest, ruled the burgesses with the iron sway of tyranny.  From this
thraldom they were somewhat relieved by Henry I., who conferred on them
many valuable privileges, and diminished the rent of their town.  Henry
II. was the first king who granted them a written charter, but from his
time to the reign of James II. almost every successive sovereign has
confirmed or enlarged their privileges and customs.  A guild merchant
existed here, antecedent to the 11th John, and was recognized and
established by charter of 11th Henry III. 1226–7, by which, every one
carrying on business in the town was compelled to become a member of it.
The town was anciently governed by two Bailiffs or Provosts, until the
Corporation was remodelled by charter of 14th Charles I., under which it
consisted of a Mayor, (annually elected,) Recorder, Steward, Town Clerk,
24 Aldermen, 48 Common Councilmen, 2 Chamberlains, and inferior officers.
Under the Municipal Reform Act, Shrewsbury was divided into five wards,
and is now governed by a Mayor, 10 Aldermen, and 30 Councilmen.  There
are also 12 magistrates appointed by the Crown to assist in the local
government of the town.



THE MARKET SQUARE


presents an interesting and antique appearance, on account of the
numerous old timber houses, which still remain on its sides.  It consists
of a large oblong space, the northern half of which affords room for an
excellent Green or Vegetable Market, whilst the southern half is occupied



THE MARKET HOUSE,


                         [Picture: Market House]

which, according to an inscription over the northern arch, was erected in
1595, at the expense of the Corporation.  It is one of the most spacious
and magnificent structures of its kind in the kingdom; is of wrought
freestone, and in the fantastic style of the 16th century.  The principal
front faces the west, and has in the centre a spacious portal; over which
are sculptured, in high relief, the arms of Elizabeth, under a canopy
adorned with roses, with the date 1596.  Attached to the imposts of the
great arch are pillars, each supporting a figure of a lion, with a blank
shield on its breast.  Above are two stories, with large square mullioned
windows.  On each side the portal is an open arcade of three spacious
round arches, reposing on massive pillars; over which, a range of square
mullioned windows lights the upper story, which is surmounted by a rich,
though singular parapet, with grotesque pinnacles.  [Picture: Statue of
Richard of York] [Picture: Angel under canopied niche] Large open arches
occupy the north and south ends, which are terminated above in sharp
pointed gables.  Above the northern arch, in a tabernacled embattled
niche, is a statue of Richard, Duke of York, father of Edward IV. clothed
in complete armour, and a surcoat emblazoned with his armorial bearings,
removed from the tower on the Old Welsh Bridge, on its demolition in
1791.  On his left are the town arms, _azure_, _three leopards’ heads_,
_or_, sculptured in relief.  The south end is decorated with a sculptured
stone, representing an angel, with expanded wings, under a canopied
niche, bearing in his hands a shield, charged with the arms of France and
England, quarterly.  This fragment of antiquity formerly stood in the
southern tower of the Castle or North Gate of the town, and was removed
hither in 1825, when that building was taken down to widen the street.
The exterior of this fine old building has of late years undergone a
needful reparation and careful restoration, and its northern front has
recently received the useful appendage of an excellent clock, illuminated
by gas, constructed by Joyce, of Whitchurch, in this County.  The lower
area is appropriated to the excellent Corn Market held here every
Saturday.

General Markets are held on Wednesday and Saturday in every week, and
Fairs for Cattle of all kinds, in the Smithfield, on alternate Tuesdays,
and for Butter and Cheese, on the second Wednesday in each month.

The spacious apartments in the upper story of the Market Hall are
occupied by the



MECHANICS’ INSTITUTION,


originally established in 1825, and supported by subscriptions and
donations.  The present number of the members is 200.  The Library
comprises 2000 volumes, and the Reading Room is supplied with Periodicals
and Newspapers.  There are Classes for the English and French languages,
Arithmetic, Mathematics, Music, Writing, Modelling and Drawing; and
during the winter months Lectures are delivered every fortnight.  The
subscription is Ten Shillings and upwards per annum for members, and Five
Shillings for students.

On the south side of the Market Square are



THE PUBLIC ROOMS,


                         [Picture: Public Rooms]

erected in 1840, by Mr. Stant, after the design of Mr. Haycock.  On the
ground floor in front is the principal entrance to the


PUBLIC SUBSCRIPTION NEWS-ROOM,


which is immediately above, and also to the spacious


MUSIC HALL,


which occupies the remaining portion of the second floor.  The third
story is divided into various rooms, used as Billiard Rooms, &c.  The
back apartments on the ground floor are appropriated to the Street Act
Offices, and dwelling for hall-keeper, &c.

The Public News-Room, supported by annual subscriptions, is supplied with
the principal London and Provincial Newspapers, Journals, Magazines, &c.
and is open from 8 a.m. till 10 p.m.

The Music Hall is 90 feet in length, and 42 feet wide, and 38 feet high,
with an Orchestra at the south end, containing a very fine-toned and
powerful Organ, built by Bishop of London, and presented to the Choral
Society of the town, by the late Rev. Richard Scott, B.D.

Adjacent are the Stamp Office, the Salop Fire Office, the Police Station,
and Post Office,—the two latter in the “Talbot Buildings,” recently well
known as the old established “Talbot Inn,” formerly the warehouses of an
eminent draper of the town, of the name of Oteley, of the family of
Oteley, of Pitchford, County of Salop, and erected on the site of some of
the buildings probably belonging to Vaughan’s Mansion, as is evident from
the old stone foundations and singular vaults still existing in the
basement.

Looking towards the north, and turning on the left, we enter the High
Street, where on the left-hand side is a noble timber house, now divided
into separate dwellings, once the town residence of the (now extinct)
family of Ireland, of Albrighton.  When entire, it must have presented a
grand and imposing appearance.  The front consists principally of four
deep ranges of bow windows, four stories high, very lofty, and terminated
above in pointed gables, on each of which, are escutcheons of the arms of
the Ireland family.  _Gules_, _six fleurs de lys_, _three_, _two_, _and
one_, _argent_.  The principal entrance is through a flat Gothic arch.
The premises are now the property of the Corbets of Sundorne.

                       [Picture: Ireland’s Mansion]

Immediately fronting the High Street, behind the premises of Mr. Burrey,
upholsterer, are the remains of some extensive building of red stone,
probably ecclesiastical, and in the style of the 14th century.
Considerable doubts have been entertained by our best antiquarians
concerning these remnants of fallen grandeur, and no record is extant by
which their use or name can be ascertained with any certainty.  In an
entry in the chartulary of Haughmond Abbey, in this county, of the early
date of 2d Rich. II. 1378, these premises are mentioned, as having been
known before that time, by the name of



“BENNETTE’S HALLE,”


but when or from what cause they acquired that appellation is unknown.

                      [Picture: “Bennette’s Halle”]

Turning to the right, we proceed up Pride Hill, on the right-hand side of
which may be seen many curious old timber houses, the ancient mansions of
our honest burghers.

Midway of Pride Hill, on the right, is the



DOUBLE BUTCHER ROW,


in which are also many interesting specimens of domestic architecture.

At the top of Pride Hill, on the right, is



THE BUTTER CROSS,


intended for the accommodation of persons bringing Butter, Eggs, and
Poultry to the markets.  The old cross, a heavy, inconvenient brick
building, with a large reservoir on its top for supplying the upper parts
of the town with water, stood nearly in the centre of the thoroughfare,
whence it was removed in 1818, and another erected at the expense of the
Corporation, on the present site; which also proving insufficient and
inconvenient, was taken down, and the present structure, on an enlarged
scale, built in 1844, by the Corporation, aided by the subscriptions of
the town and neighbourhood.

                  [Picture: Timber Houses on Pride Hill]

In early times a Cross stood on this spot, of which frequent mention is
made in old documents, by the name of the High Cross, and the adjoining
street was called the High Pavement.  Here proclamations were accustomed
to be made, and criminals executed.  This cross is remarkable as the
place on which David, the last of the British Princes of Wales, underwent
a cruel and ignominious death, by order of Edward I. and where many
noblemen, taken prisoners at the battle of Shrewsbury, were executed.

On part of the site of the present Cross stood, previously, an ancient
timber structure, probably part of the collegiate buildings of the
adjacent church of St. Mary.

Nearly opposite the Butter Cross, on the left-hand side of the street, is
an old mansion, now new-fronted, modernised, partially rebuilt, and
divided, once, it is believed, the residence of the opulent and ancient,
but now extinct, family of the Prides, who gave their name to the street
“Pride Hill.”  Some idea of its former splendour may have been collected
from the ornamented plaster ceilings, which remained in several of the
rooms, but which, by recent alterations, are probably now removed.

Proceeding onwards, we shortly reach, on the left,



THE RAVEN INN,


where the ingenious George Farquhar wrote his sprightly but licentious
comedy of “The Recruiting Officer,” during his residence in our town in
1704, in that capacity.  The scene of the play is laid in Shrewsbury, and
though the plot may not have had any foundation in reality, it has been
ascertained, on indubitable evidence, that the author took for the
originals of his characters, many distinguished persons, living or well
known at that time, in the town and neighbourhood.  The window of the
room, which tradition points out as that in which the drama was composed,
still exists, and may be seen from the yard of the Inn.

At the end of Castle Street, on the right side, the remains of



ST. NICHOLAS’S CHAPEL


present themselves to the spectator; the architecture of which, with the
exception of a pointed window at the west end of later date, is entirely
of the early Norman era: and it is highly probable that the Chapel was
erected by Roger de Montgomery, the first Norman Earl of Shrewsbury, for
the use of such of his retainers as resided in the outer works of the
Castle.  The only portions of this edifice at present remaining, are the
nave, a massive semicircular arch, formerly opening into the (now
entirely destroyed) chancel, and two similar side arches.  The building
is the property of the Lysters of Rowton, and has been converted into two
stables and a coach-house.

Immediately adjoining, on the right, is the venerable and
highly-ornamented timber



GATEWAY OF THE COUNCIL HOUSE,


                 [Picture: Gateway of the Council House]

which presents an interesting and curious specimen of the domestic
architecture of the year 1620; that date, and the initials W O E,
indicating it to have been built by one of the Owens of Condover, the
then possessors of this property, being still visible on the
south-eastern front.

Entering through this gateway, we approach



THE COUNCIL HOUSE,


which is so called from having been the occasional residence of the
Council of the Marches of Wales, during their annual visit to our town.
{20}  It is situated on a lofty bank, which abruptly rises above the
river Severn, and commands a most interesting and enlivening prospect of
the surrounding country.  The buildings occupy three sides of a small
court, and are now divided into three excellent houses.  Of late years
they have been so considerably altered and modernised that little of the
original structure is at present discernible.  That portion which
includes the Hall and the Great Chamber over it, comprises nearly the
whole of the building which retains any resemblance of its original
features.  These once magnificent apartments, during the last
alterations, were subdivided and despoiled of the stained glass,
elaborately carved chimney pieces, {21} and richly ornamented ceilings,
which contributed so largely to their former splendour.  The carved
wooden porch, once affording entrance to the hall, has, with other
relics, been carefully preserved.

The house was originally erected about 1501, by Peter Newton, Esq. one of
the Council of the Marches, and having passed through numerous hands, is
now the property of the Lysters of Rowton.

This venerable mansion afforded, in 1642, an asylum to the unhappy
Charles the First, upon the commencement of his troubles.  His Majesty
resided here for six weeks, during which time the gentry of Shropshire
flocked around him, and testified their deep attachment and unshaken
loyalty, by contributing most liberally in this hour of need to their
sovereign’s exigencies.  James II. also on his visit to the town, kept
his court here on the 24th of August, 1687.

The next object which demands our attention is



THE GATEWAY OF THE CASTLE,


the arch of which is the only existing part of the original Norman
fortress of Roger de Montgomery.  It is eighteen feet in height,
semicircular, with plain round facings, and its walls appear to have
sustained a tower, from whence hung the portcullis.

                     [Picture: Gateway of the Castle]

Through this gateway we are conducted into the inner court of whence we
obtain a comprehensive view of the existing remains, which consist of the
keep, the walls of the inner court, and a lofty mound on the south side,
probably part of the early fortress constructed here by the Britons.
From the various dilapidations and changes which the fortress has
undergone during the course of many centuries, no adequate idea can now
be formed of its original size and strength.  The Castle stands boldly
elevated on a steep bank of earth, on the narrow isthmus formed by the
Severn, and is approached from the town by a gentle ascent.

                         [Picture: Laura’s Tower]

The Keep, the walls of which are of great strength and thickness, was
erected by Edward I. and is a square building, connected with two round
towers of equal diameter, embattled and pierced, and originally consisted
of one great apartment on each of the upper floors.  The interior, as
well as the exterior, has been greatly altered.  A handsome stone
staircase, of modern construction, leads from the vestibule (in which is
a statue of the founder, Roger de Montgomery), to the principal
apartments.  The drawing room, used as a guard-chamber in the time of
Charles 1st, is spacious and handsome.  A stone stair-case within the
wall, lighted by narrow chinks, leads to an apartment in the western
tower, in which was a recess, with a strong groined ceiling, and small
acutely pointed windows.

[Picture: Watch tower] The summit of the mound above mentioned, is
crowned with ruinous walls, and an ancient watch tower, which, during the
last repairs was converted into a delightful summer room, commanding a
fine panoramic view, and now called LAURA’S TOWER.

On the east side of the court is a postern, built probably during the
civil wars; and adjacent to it are the massive foundations of an ancient
tower.

In the area of the court, now entirely cleared of buildings, the Knights
of the Shire have, from time immemorial, been girt with their swords by
the Sheriff.

Of that invariable appendage of castles, the Chapel of St. Michael, all
traces have long been swept away.  Its site is even now a matter of
conjecture.  Originally it was endowed with considerable landed estates,
was a “Royal Free Chapel,” and was subsequently granted, with its
appendant, the Church of St. Juliana, in this town, by Henry IV. to his
College erected at Battlefield, in commemoration of his victory there.

Roger de Montgomery, the first Norman Earl of Shrewsbury, is regarded as
the founder of the Castle, though it is more probable that he only
enlarged a smaller fortress which is known to have existed here anterior
to his times.  To afford an eligible site for his new buildings, he is
stated to have destroyed fifty-one houses; a fifth part of the whole town
at that period.  On the forfeiture of Earl Robert de Belesme, in the time
of Henry I., the castle became a royal fortress, and was entrusted to the
custody of the Sheriff, and the vast possessions annexed to it were
parcelled out among various knights, to be held by the service of castle
ward.  During the turbulent reign of Henry III. the castle fell into a
state of great dilapidation, but his son, Edward I., immediately on his
accession, almost entirely rebuilt the structure; which, upon the
submission of the Welsh, being no longer needed as a military fortress,
was again abandoned to ruin and decay.

In the reign of Elizabeth a grant was made of its site and buildings to
Richard Onslow, Esq. who subsequently transferred his interest to the
Corporation.  During the civil wars it was repaired and garrisoned for
the royal party; but being besieged by the parliamentary forces, it
surrendered in 1645, and escaped demolition by being entrusted to Colonel
Mitton, a native of the county.  On the Restoration it reverted to the
Corporation, who, in 1663, surrendering their title to Charles II., that
monarch presented it to Francis Viscount Newport, afterwards Earl of
Bradford, from whom it has passed to the present proprietor, the Duke of
Cleveland.

Nearly opposite the Castle is



THE ROYAL FREE GRAMMAR SCHOOL OF KING EDWARD VI.


founded by that monarch by letters patent, dated 10th February, 1552, and
endowed with portions of the estates of the late dissolved Colleges of
St. Mary and St. Chad, in this town.  The original endowment, on the
request of the learned, estimable, and ever to be venerated Thomas
Ashton, the first Schoolmaster, was considerably enlarged by Queen
Elizabeth, in the 13th year of her reign, by a donation of other portions
of the properties of those ecclesiastical institutions.  Mr. Ashton
himself left by will a handsome legacy; and Dr. John Taylor, the learned
editor of Demosthenes, bequeathed the greater part of his valuable
library.

                   [Picture: Royal Free Grammar School]

The amount of the present annual revenue is £3086. 15s. 1d. which is
appropriated in the payment of the Salaries of the Masters and Bailiff,
the maintenance of scholarships and exhibitions in the Universities, the
stipends of the Vicar of Chirbury, and the Curates of St. Mary, Clive,
and Astley, the necessary repairs, &c. of the school-buildings and
estate, the Library, Rewards, Prizes, &c., providing residences for the
Incumbents of the School livings, and a Play-ground.  The surplus is
applied to the formation of a Reserved Fund, not exceeding £5000, to be
applied from time to time, under the direction of the Court of Chancery,
for repairs, &c. of the School buildings and Estate.

The head-master receives a salary of £425, including £100 for
Mathematical instruction, and a further sum of £40 as catechist and
reader; the second master £200, and the third master £100, with the use
of dwelling-houses, free from rent, taxes, and repairs; the French and
German master £50, and the writing master £50.

The exhibitions and scholarships from this school to both Universities,
are numerous and valuable, and are mostly confined to the sons of
burgesses, (who have attended the school for two years), born in the town
or suburbs, or in the Abbey Foregate; or in default of such, to persons
born in the parish of Chirbury; or in default of such, to those born in
the county of Salop.


ADVANTAGES OPEN TO ALL BOYS EDUCATED AT SHREWSBURY SCHOOL.


Four scholarships of £63 per annum each, on the foundation of John
Millington, D.D. at Magdalen College, Cambridge, tenable during residence
till M.A.  Electors, the Master and Fellows of the College.

One Fellowship of £126 per annum, on the same foundation, in the same
College.  Electors, the same.

One Exhibition of £23 per annum, on the foundation of John Taylor, D.D.
open to any College.  Electors, the Head and Second Masters, and the
Mayor of Shrewsbury.

One Exhibition of £10 per annum, on the foundation of Mrs. Nonnely, for a
boy proceeding to the University of Oxford.

One Exhibition of £30 per annum, on the foundation of Mr. Podmore, for a
boy nominated by the Head Master, and proceeding to Trinity College,
Cambridge.

Prizes for Composition in the Greek, Latin, and English Languages, are
awarded annually, with a Gold Medal to the best Scholar leaving School
for the University.  There are also Exhibitions for which Shrewsbury
School has a preference, at Balliol College, Oxford, and at St. John’s
College, Cambridge.


ADVANTAGES LIMITED IN POINT OF QUALIFICATION.


Five Exhibitions of £50 per annum each, tenable for four years.
Electors, the Trustees of the School.

Two Exhibitions founded by Mr. James Millington, for sons of burgesses
born in Frankwell, and proceeding from the School in Millington’s
Hospital to Shrewsbury School, and thence to Magdalen College, Cambridge.
Electors, the Trustees of Millington’s Hospital.  Value £40 per annum
each.

Two Exhibitions, founded by Oswald Smith, of £25 per annum each, for sons
of burgesses.  Electors, the Head and Second Masters, and the Incumbent
of St. Mary’s, Shrewsbury.

Four Exhibitions to Christ Church, Oxford, founded by Mr. Careswell, for
natives of Shropshire.  Examiners, the Dean of Christ Church, or his
Deputy.  Electors, two or more Justices of the Peace for the County.
Present value £60 per annum each.

The whole management of the school and revenue, was, by Act of
Parliament, 38 George III. vested in the Bishop of Lichfield as Visitor,
and Thirteen Governors and Trustees.  The election of the head and second
masters rests solely in the Master and Fellows of St. John’s College,
Cambridge.  The under-master is appointed by the head-master.

All the sons of burgesses of Shrewsbury, who are not under eight nor more
than twenty years of age, may be admitted on the foundation, on
application to the head-master, provided they are able to write and read
English.  Any boys not sons of burgesses may be admitted on payment of
certain fees,—viz. two guineas admission, and fifteen guineas yearly.

The instruction in the schools is “in the Holy Scriptures, the Church
Catechism, the Liturgy, Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England,
the Greek, Latin, English and French languages, Reading, Writing, and
Grammar, in Ancient and Modern History, sacred as well as profane, and
Geography, in Arithmetic and Mathematics, and also in such other modern
Languages, Arts and Sciences, as the Governors, with the consent of the
Visitor, shall think proper.”

The head-master is Rev. B. H. Kennedy, D.D.; the second master is Rev. W.
Burbury, M.A.; the third master, H. Greenwood, Esq. M.A.; the assistant
classical master, Edward Calvert, Esq. M.A.; Mathematics and Arithmetic,
Rev. A. T. Paget, M.A.; Modern Languages, T. A. Bentley, Esq.; Latin
Accidence and Writing, Mr. T. N. Henshaw.

Among the many persons of eminence who have received their education at
this school we may enumerate Sir Philip Sidney; his friend, Sir Fulke
Greville, Lord Brook; the son of Edwyn Sandys, Archbishop of York; the
cruel Judge Jeffries; Lord Chief Justices Jones and Price; Dr. Bowers,
Bishop of Chichester; Dr. John Thomas, Bishop of Salisbury; Dr. John
Taylor, editor of Lysias and Demosthenes; Dr. Edward Waring, Lucasian
Professor of Mathematics; James Harrington, the author of “Oceana;”
Wycherley, the Dramatist; Ambrose Phillips, the Poet; and the Venerable
Archdeacon Owen, and the Rev. J. B. Blakeway, the learned and estimable
Historians of Shrewsbury.

Through the indefatigable exertions and learning of the late venerated
head-master, (The Right Reverend Samuel Butler, D.D.  F.R.S. &c. late
Lord Bishop of Lichfield,) the institution attained to an unrivalled
celebrity and repute, most deservedly ranking among the first public
schools in England.  And as an earnest of continued prosperity, we cannot
do better than refer to the words of the venerable Bishop, who, on
resigning his arduous duties to his learned and talented successor,
stated “that he considered Dr. Kennedy, as the most brilliant scholar he
had ever sent forth, as the brightest star in that galaxy of
distinguished pupils whose names adorn the ‘Boards’ of Shrewsbury
School.—That from Dr. Kennedy’s experience of his system, both as a pupil
and assistant master at Shrewsbury School, from his constant practice as
a lecturer and private tutor at College, and as an assistant master for
six years or more at Harrow, as well as from his own unrivalled talents
and high literary distinctions, from his fine taste and sound learning,
there was not a shadow of doubt but that he would fully maintain the
reputation which Shrewsbury School had already acquired, and would add,
at least as many distinguished names to its Boards, during his
superintendence of this important foundation, as had been inscribed there
by himself in any equal period.”  These bright anticipations of the
venerated Bishop have been already, and are daily more and more fully
realized.

More than 100 gentlemen educated at Shrewsbury School have during the
present century been elected Fellows of various Colleges in both
Universities, and nearly 250 Scholars and Exhibitioners; of whom more
than forty have subsequently been Tutors or Lecturers in their several
Colleges.

Permission having been kindly granted, we are enabled to give the
following copy of the BOARDS alluded to:—

1806      THOMAS SMART HUGHES, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Browne
          Medal_, _Latin Ode_.
1807      THOMAS SMART HUGHES, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Browne
          Medal_, _Greek Ode_.
          JOHN TURNER, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Second
          Bachelor’s Prize_.
1809      THOMAS SMART HUGHES, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _First
          Bachelor’s Prize_.
1810      THOMAS SMART HUGHES, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _First
          Bachelor’s Prize_.
          WILLIAM HENRY PARRY, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Third
          Bachelor’s Prize_.
1811      ROBERT WILSON EVANS, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Second
          Medallist_.
1812      MARMADUKE LAWSON, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Browne
          Medal_, _Latin Ode_.
          ROBERT WILSON EVANS, Trinity College, Cambridge, _First
          Bachelor’s Prize_.
1813      WILLIAM HENRY PARRY, St. John’s College, Cambridge,
          _Norrisian Prize_.
          ROBERT WILSON EVANS, Trinity College, Cambridge, _First
          Bachelor’s Prize_.
1814      MARMADUKE LAWSON, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Pitt
          University Scholar_, (the first elected on that
          foundation.)
1816      MARMADUKE LAWSON, Magdalen College, Cambridge, _Medallist_.
          RICHARD P. THURSFIELD, St. John’s College, Cambridge,
          _Second Bell’s Scholar_.
1817      REV. T. SMART HUGHES, Fellow of Edmund College, Cambridge,
          and Proctor of the University, _The Seatonian Prize_.
1819      SPENCER WILDE, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Recorded
          Equal to Bell’s Scholar_.
1821      EDWARD BAINES, Christ College, Cambridge, _Second Bell’s
          Scholar_.
1822      T. WILLIAMS, Oriel College, Oxford, _First Class_, _Lit.
          Hum._
1823      JOHN PRICE, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Recorded Equal
          to Bell’s Scholar_.
          BENJAMIN HALL KENNEDY, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _The
          Porson Prize_.
          BENJAMIN HALL KENNEDY, St. John’s College, Cambridge,
          _Adjudged the Browne Medal_, _Latin Ode_.
1824      BENJAMIN HALL KENNEDY, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Pitt
          University Scholar_.
          BENJAMIN HALL KENNEDY, St. John’s College, Cambridge,
          _Browne Medal_, _Greek Ode_.
          BENJAMIN HALL KENNEDY, St. John’s College, Cambridge,
          _Browne Medal_, _Latin Ode_.
          BENJAMIN HALL KENNEDY, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _The
          Porson Prize_.
1825      THOMAS WILLIAMSON PEILE, Trinity College, Cambridge,
          _Davies University Scholar_.
          JOHN HODGSON, Trinity College, Cambridge, _The Parson
          Prize_.
          BENJAMIN HALL KENNEDY, St. John’s College, Cambridge,
          _Browne’s Medal_, _Epigram_.
1826      JOHN HODGSON, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Second
          Medallist_.
          HORATIO HILDYARD, Peterhouse, Cambridge, _First Bell’s
          Scholar_.
          THOMAS BUTLER, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Recorded
          Equal to Bell’s Scholar_.
          BENJAMIN HALL KENNEDY, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _The
          Porson Prize_.
1827      BENJAMIN HALL KENNEDY, St. John’s College, Cambridge,
          _Senior Medallist_.
          GEORGE H. JOHNSON, Queen’s College, Oxford, _Ireland
          University Scholar_.
          THOMAS WILLIAMSON PEILE, Trinity College, Cambridge,
          _Second Undergraduate’s Latin Essay_.
1828      CHARLES KENNEDY, Trinity College, Cambridge, _First Bell’s
          Scholar_.
          THOMAS WILLIAMSON PEILE, Trinity College, Cambridge,
          _Second Medallist_.
          EDWARD MASSIE, Wadham College, Oxford, _Ireland University
          Scholar_.
          BENJAMIN HALL KENNEDY, St. John’s College, Cambridge,
          _First Bachelor’s Prize_.
          GEORGE H. JOHNSON, Queen’s College, Oxford, _Double First
          Class_.
1829      CHARLES BORRETT, Magdalen College, Oxford, _Ireland
          University Scholar_.
          JOHN THOMAS, Wadham College, Oxford, _Craven University
          Scholar_.
          CHARLES KENNEDY, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Browne
          Medal_, _Greek Ode_.
          CHARLES KENNEDY, Trinity College, Cambridge, _The Porson
          Prize_.
          HERBERT JOHNSON, Wadham College, Oxford, _First Class_,
          _Lit. Hum._
1830      CHARLES KENNEDY, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Pitt
          University Scholar_.
          PETER S. PAYNE, Balliol College, Oxford, _Ireland
          University Scholar_.
          JAMES HILDYARD, Christ College, Cambridge, _Browne Medal_,
          _Greek Ode_.
          CHARLES KENNEDY, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Browne
          Medal_, _Greek Ode_.
          ROBERT SCOTT, Christ Church, Oxford, _Craven University
          Scholar_.
          CHARLES KENNEDY, Trinity College, Cambridge, _The Porson
          Prize_.
1831      JAMES HILDYARD, Christ College, Cambridge, _Battie
          University Scholar_.
          THOMAS BRANCKER, Wadham College, Oxford, _elected Ireland
          University Scholar_, while yet in the Sixth Form of
          Shrewsbury School.
          GEORGE KENNEDY, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _First
          Bell’s Scholar_.
          GEORGE H. JOHNSON, Queen’s College, Oxford, _Mathematical
          University Scholar_, (the first elected on that
          foundation.)
          JAMES HILDYARD, Christ College, Cambridge, _Browne Medal_,
          _Greek Ode_.
          JAMES HILDYARD, Christ College, Cambridge, _Browne Medal_,
          _Latin Ode_.
          JAMES HILDYARD, Christ College, Cambridge, _Browne Medal_,
          _Epigrams_.
          GEORGE KENNEDY, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _The Porson
          Prize_.
          PETER S. PAYNE, Balliol College, Oxford, _First Class_,
          _Lit. Hum._
1832      GEORGE KENNEDY, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Davies
          University Scholar_.
          HORATIO HILDYARD, Peterhouse, Cambridge, _Second Bachelor’s
          Prize_.
          JOHN THOMAS, Trinity College, Oxford, _Latin Verse Prize_.
          JAMES HILDYARD, Christ College, Cambridge, _Browne Medal_,
          _Greek Ode_.
          JAMES HILDYARD, Christ College, Cambridge, _Browne Medal_,
          _Latin Ode_.
          JAMES HILDYARD, Christ College, Cambridge, _Member’s
          Prize_, _Latin Essay_.
1833      ROBERT SCOTT, Christ Church, Oxford, _Ireland University
          Scholar_.
          JAMES HILDYARD, Christ College, Cambridge, _Second
          Medallist_.
          GEORGE H. MARSH, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Bell’s
          Scholar_.
          JOHN GIBBONS LONGUEVILLE, Wadham College, Oxford, _First
          Class_, _Lit. Hum._
          ROBERT SCOTT, Student of Christ Church, Oxford, _First
          Class_, _Lit. Hum._
          THOMAS F. HENNEY, Pembroke College, Oxford, _First Class_,
          _Lit. Hum._
          JAMES HILDYARD, Christ College, Cambridge, _First
          Bachelor’s Prize_.
          WILLIAM FLETCHER, Trinity College, Oxford, _First Class_,
          _Lit. Hum._
1834      ALEXANDER G. HILDYARD, Pembroke College, Cambridge, _Second
          Bell’s Scholar_.
          ROBERT SCOTT, Student of Christ Church, Oxford, _Bachelor’s
          Latin Essay_.
1835      WILLIAM GILSON HUMPHRY, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Pitt
          University Scholar_.
          GEORGE AUGUSTUS MAY, Magdalen College, Cambridge, _Bell’s
          Scholar_.
          EDWARD J. EDWARDS, Balliol College, Oxford, _Kennicott
          Hebrew Scholar_.
1836      WILLIAM DICKENSON, Trinity College, Oxford, _Latin Verse
          Prize_.
          W. G. HUMPHRY, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Latin Essay_.
          W. G. HUMPHRY, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Second
          Medallist_.
1837      HENRY HOLDEN, Balliol College, Oxford, _First Class_, _Lit.
          Hum._
1838      JAMES FRASER, Scholar of Lincoln College, Oxford, _Recorded
          Second to Ireland University Scholar_, with the words
          “_proxime accesssit_.”
          REV. R. SCOTT, M.A.  Fellow of Balliol College, Oxford,
          _Denyer’s Theological Essay_.
          ROBERT MIDDLETON DUKES, Scholar of Lincoln College, Oxford,
          _First Class_, _Lit. Hum._
          THOMAS EVANS, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _The Porson
          Prize_.
          WILLIAM DICKENSON, Trinity College, Oxford, _Latin Essay_.
1839      JAMES FRASER, Lincoln College, Oxford, _Ireland University
          Scholar_.
          EDWARD M. COPE, Scholar of Trinity College, Cambridge, _The
          Porson Prize_.
          JAMES FRASER, Lincoln College, Oxford, _First Class_, _Lit.
          Hum._
1840      EDWARD BATHER, Merton College, Oxford, _First Class_, _Lit.
          Hum._
          JOHN BATHER, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Reexamined
          with Craven’s University Scholar_.
1841      HUGH A. JOHNSTON MUNRO, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Lord
          Craven’s University Scholar_.
          GEORGE DRUCE, St. Peter’s College, Cambridge, _The Porson
          Prize_.
          GEORGE NUGEE, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Latin Essay_.
1842      EDWIN H. GIFFORD, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Pitt
          University Scholar_.
          HUGH A. J. MUNRO, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Senior
          Chancellor’s Medallist_.
          GEORGE DRUCE, St. Peter’s College, Cambridge, _The Porson
          Prize_.
          WILLIAM GEORGE CLARK, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Browne
          Medal_, _Epigrams_.
          THOMAS RAMSBOTHAM, Christ College, Cambridge, _Latin
          Essay_.
          W. T. BASIL JONES, Trinity College, Oxford, _Ireland
          University Scholar_.
1843      E. H. GIFFORD, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Senior
          Chancellor’s Medallist_.
          GEORGE DRUCE, St. Peter’s College, Cambridge, _Junior
          Chancellor’s Medallist_.
          REV. M. BRIGHT, Magdalen College, Cambridge, _Tyrwhitt’s
          Hebrew Scholar_.
          W. G. CLARK, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Browne Medal_,
          _Greek Ode_.
          W. G. CLARE, Trinity College, Cambridge, _The Porson
          Prize_.
          G. NUGEE, B.A. Trinity College, Cambridge, _Latin Essay_.
1844      W. G. CLARK, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Second
          Chancellor’s Medallist_.
          GEORGE OSBORNE MORGAN, Balliol College, Oxford, _Craven
          University Scholar_, while yet in the Sixth Form of
          Shrewsbury School.
          J. G. FUSSELL, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Browne Medal_,
          _Epigrams_.
          J. G. FUSSELL, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Latin Essay_.
1845      JAMES RIDDELL, Balliol College, Oxford, _First Class_,
          _Lit. Hum._
          H. DE WINTON, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Browne Medal_,
          _Greek Ode_.
          GEORGE NUGEE, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Sir Peregrine
          Maitland’s Prize for Christian Essay_.
1846      GEORGE OSBORNE MORGAN, Balliol College, Oxford, _Sir R.
          Newdigate’s Prize for English Poem_.
1847      GEORGE OSBORNE MORGAN, Worcester College, Oxford, _First
          Class_, _Lit. Hum._
1848      H. C. TAYLER, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Browne Medal_,
          _Epigrams_.
1849      WILLIAM OWEN, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Recorded
          Second to Craven University Scholar_.
          WILLIAM OWEN, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _The Marquis
          Camden’s Gold Medal for Latin Poem_.
          FRANCIS KEWLEY, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _The Porson
          Prize_.
1850      T. CLAYTON, Trinity College, Oxford, _Hertford University
          Scholar_.
          WILLIAM OWEN, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _The Porson
          Prize_.
          P. PERRING, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Browne’s Medal_,
          _Greek Ode_.
          G. O. MORGAN, Worcester College, Oxford, _English Essay_.
          G. B. MORLEY, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _The Porson
          Prize_.
          G. O. MORGAN, University College, Oxford, _Eldon Law
          Scholarship_.
          H. C. A. TAYLER, Trinity College, Cambridge, _Latin Essay_.
1852      S. H. BURBURY, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _The Porson
          Prize_.
          D. TRINDER, Exeter College, Oxford, _Mrs. Denyer’s
          Theological Essay_.
          J. L. BALFOUR, Queen’s College, Oxford, _Ellerton’s
          Theological Essay_.
          HENRY PARKER, Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford, _Latin
          Essay_.
          W. INGE, Worcester College, Oxford, _First Glass
          Moderations_.
1853      EDWARD L. BROWN, Trinity College, Cambridge, _First Bell’s
          Scholar_.
          S. H. BURBURY, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _Craven
          University Scholar_.
          S. H. BURBURY, St. John’s College, Cambridge, _The Porson
          Prize_.
          W. INGE, Worcester College, Oxford, _First Class_, _Lit.
          Hum._
          A. B. ROCKE, Christ Church, Oxford, _First Class_,
          _Moderations_.
1855      E. L. BROWN, Trinity College, Cambridge, _The Porson
          Prize_.

Cambridge First Class Classics.

1824      Edward Baines, Christ College                            4th
1825      John Price, St. John’s College                           3rd
          John Hodgson, Trinity College                            5th
          Frederick E. Gretton, St. John’s                         7th
          College
1827      BENJAMIN HALL KENNEDY, St. John’s                    SENIOR.
          College
          George A. Butterton, St. John’s College                  3rd
1828      T. W. Peile, Trinity College                             2nd
1829      Horatio S. Hildyard, Peterhouse                          5th
          Robert Smith, St. John’s College                         6th
          Thomas Butler, St. John’s College                        7th
1831      CHARLES KENNEDY, Trinity College                     SENIOR.
          Charles J. Johnstone, Caius College                      4th
1832      Richard Shilleto, Trinity College                        2nd
          Edward Broadhurst, Magdalen College                      7th
1833      James Hildyard, Christ College                           2nd
1834      GEORGE F. KENNEDY, St. John’s College                SENIOR.
          Edward Warter, Magdalen College                          4th
1835      George F. Harris, Trinity College                        3rd
          John Cooper, Trinity College                             7th
1836      Geo. Hy. Marsh, St. John’s College                       2nd
          William H. Bateson, St. John’s College                   3rd
          Richard Edward Turner, Trinity College                   6th
1837      W. GILSON HUMPHRY, Trinity College                   SENIOR.
1838      George A. C. May, Magdalen College                       3rd
          Henry Thompson, St. John’s College                       7th
          William Parkinson, St. John’s College                    8th
1839      Augustus W. Hopper, Trinity College                      6th
1840      FRANCIS FRANCE, St. John’s College             SENIOR ÆQUAL.
1841      EDWARD M. COPE, Trinity College                      SENIOR.
          John Bather, St. John’s College                          2nd
          Henry Thring, Magdalen College                           3rd
1842      Hugh A. J. Munro, Trinity College                        2nd
          Francis Morse, St. John’s College                        7th
1843      GEORGE DRUCE, St. Peter’s College             SENIORS ÆQUAL.

          EDWIN H. GIFFORD, St. John’s Coll.
1844      William G. Clark, Trinity College                        2nd
1846      H. De Winton, Trinity College                            3rd
1848      J. E. B. Mayor, St. John’s College                       3rd
1849      H. C. A. Tayler, Trinity College                         4th
1851      J. W. Taylor, St. Peter’s College                       12th
1852      ROBERT BURN, Trinity College                   SENIOR ÆQUAL.
          Philip Perring, Trinity College                          4th
          W. Chandless, Trinity College                            5th
          Arthur White, Magdalen College                          16th
1854      S. H. Burbury, St. John’s College                        2nd
          G. M. Campbell, St. John’s College                       7th
          H. Day, St. John’s College                               9th

Cambridge Wranglers.

1808      W. H. Parry, St. John’s College                    16th
1809      John Evans, Clare Hall                              6th
          W. R. Gilby, Trinity College                        7th
1811      R. W. Evans, Trinity College                        7th
1824      W. Crawley, Magdalen College                       27th
1826      John Hodgson, Trinity College                      16th
1827      George A. Butterton, St. John’s College             8th
1828      T. W. Peile, Trinity College                       18th
1830      CHARLES WHITLEY, St. John’s College             SENIOR.
          Edward Yardley, Magdalen College                   40th
1834      Henry Trentham, St. John’s College                 13th
1835      Francis Procter, Catharine Hall                    30th
          John Cooper, Trinity College                       33rd
1836      W. Twiss Turner, Trinity College                   15th
          Thomas E. H. Headlam, Trinity College              17th
1837      Alexander J. Ellis, Trinity College                 5th
          William Gilson Humphry, Trinity College            27th
1838      H. J. Hodgson, Trinity College                     24th
          G. A. C. May, Magdalen College                     36th
1840      Henry Cadogan Rothery, St. John’s College          19th
1843      Edwin H. Gifford, St. John’s College               15th
1851      J. S. Clarke, St. John’s College                   11th
1854      B. W. Horne, St. John’s College                     4th
          H. Day, St. John’s College                          5th
          S. H. Burbury, St. John’s College                  15th

The structure is large, lofty, and of freestone, and surrounds two sides
of a small quadrangle.  The portion immediately fronting the street was
erected in 1630, and contains on the first and second floors dwelling
houses for the assistant masters.  The upper story is entirely occupied
by


THE PRINCIPAL SCHOOL-ROOM,


                     [Picture: Principal School-Room]

and was originally divided into three apartments by wooden carved
partitions, now removed.  The centre of this front is pierced by a
gateway, adorned on each side with a Corinthian column, supporting
statues of a scholar and graduate, bare-headed, and in the costume of the
times.  Over the arch is a sentence in Greek from Isocrates, importing
that a love of literature is essential to the formation of a scholar.
Above are the arms of Charles I.  The windows, with the exception of a
large pointed one in the style of the 14th century, at the south-end of
the principal school-room, are all of the square form of the Elizabethan
age.  The walls are crowned with a singular and clumsy battlement of
curled leaves and pinnacles.

Situated at right angles to this is the remaining wing of the edifice,
originally erected in 1595, comprising the chapel and library, with the
tower containing the staircases in the angle.

The Chapel, in which prayers are read by the headmaster every morning,
occupies the ground floor, and is divided from the ante-chapel, by an oak
screen, carved in the grotesque manner prevalent in the days of
Elizabeth.  The pulpit and BIBLE-STAND are in a similar style.  The
ceiling is adorned with carved foliated bosses, interspersed with the
arms of the founders, and of the first and late head-masters.

                   [Picture: Bible Stand in the Chapel]

Above the chapel and of the same size, is


THE LIBRARY,


                          [Picture: The Library]

containing a very valuable and extensive collection of MSS. and books.
This part was lately rebuilt and repaired at a considerable expense.  Two
large pointed windows, filled with mullioned tracery, afford light to
this venerable apartment; in the northern one of which are the arms of
Edward VI.; Queen Elizabeth; St. John’s College, Cambridge; the See of
Lichfield and Coventry impaling Cornwallis; and those of the town: and in
the southern one, those of the four principal benefactors, with
appropriate inscriptions in Latin.  Richly foliated bosses, the arms of
the founders, visitors, and thirteen first trustees, decorate the
ceiling.  Around the walls are portraits of Henry VIII. half-length; his
son Edward VI. when a boy of ten or twelve; an Admiral, full length, in
the dress of the time of Charles II.; five of the former head-masters,
and the late head-master, Bishop Butler, by Kirkby.

By the late scheme made by the Court of Chancery, (1853) a sum not
exceeding £70 yearly, is to be applied to the purchase and repairs of
Books, Mathematical, Philosophical and other instruments and articles for
instruction.

We would venture to suggest the propriety of persons educated at
Shrewsbury School, or natives of the town and county, presenting to the
Library copies of any works which they may publish.  Such a practice
would at once form an interesting memento of their connection with the
venerable institution, and add to the valuable and useful stores already
accumulated on its shelves, which in former years have been so greatly
enriched by similar benefactions.

The Library also contains three sepulchral inscribed stones, and various
other Roman antiquities from Wroxeter, and a small collection of fossils
and natural curiosities.

A court, enclosed by a stone wall, intervenes between the street and the
schools.  At the back of the school-buildings are two spacious houses for
the head and second masters, most delightfully situated, and commanding
extensive views of several portions of the town, the river and Welsh
bridge, and the rich woods of Berwick and Almond Park.  On this side are
extensive play-grounds for the use of the school.

Passing down Castle Gates, we have on our right



THE INDEPENDENT MEETING-HOUSE,


and see immediately before us



A BRIDGE


of cast-iron of 64 feet span, which carries over the street five lines of
rails of the Chester Railway.

On the right



THE STATION


of the United Railway Companies opens to view.

This striking and handsome building is in a late perpendicular English
style, and presents a frontage of upwards of 150 feet in length, and two
stories in height, with a large square tower nearly 70 feet high, in
which is one of the principal entrances, through a large four-centered
arched doorway, above which is an oriel window projecting from a richly
ornamented base, and a circular opening, within which is an excellent
eight-day clock, with the latest improvements, manufactured by Messrs.
Joyce and Son, of Whitchurch, in this county.  A richly carved
battlement, with octagonal turrets at the corners, of considerable
elevation, terminates the summit.

                        [Picture: Railway station]

On either side of the tower extends a large wing, divided into four equal
spaces by projecting turrets, corresponding with those of the tower,
surmounted with ornamental caps.  These spaces are subdivided again
horizontally above the heads of the upper and lower windows by enriched
string-courses.  Above the cornice a rich embrasured parapet runs the
whole length of the edifice.  The ridge of the roof is finished with an
ornamental cast-iron crest.  The windows are divided by stone transoms
and mullions, with projecting drip-stones, terminating in corbel heads.

The ground floor is appropriated to booking offices, ladies’ and
gentlemen’s waiting rooms, and a large refreshment room.  Beneath the
ground-floor are a large kitchen, cellars, &c.  A board-room and offices
for the various officers and clerks, occupy the upper floor.

In the left wing, as the visitor approaches, is a door opening into the
booking and parcel offices: At the end of the right wing an entrance to
the arrival and departure


PLATFORMS,


respectively 600 feet and 450 feet in length, and 16 feet wide.  A
wrought-iron roof of 70 feet span covers the platforms and lines of rails
for a space of 450 feet.

The water required for the use of the Station, Engines, and Carriages, is
conveyed in iron pipes along the rim of the railway from high ground in
the neighbourhood of Hencott, (60 feet above the level of the rails at
the Station,) to a large iron tank near the Station, whence a constant
supply can be immediately obtained in the event of fire breaking out.

The Goods, Engine Station, and Coal Depôts of the Shrewsbury and Chester
Railway are situated between Coton Hill and the General Passenger
Station, with convenient access from the Castle Foregate Street, where an
abundant supply of Welsh Coal and Lime is always on hand.

Branch lines diverge from behind the railway platforms, which pass under
Howard Street to the Canal Wharf, where is the Depôt of the Shropshire
and Staffordshire Coals and Cokes.

The Station House and Offices were designed by Mr. Thomas Penson, jun. of
Oswestry.  The Engineering works by Messrs. Robertson and Baylis.  The
former cost £6,000, the latter about £45,000, and the Goods, Engine,
Station, and other necessary works, above £20,000.

The total cost of the above works, together with the Viaduct over the
river Severn, and the brick Bridge over Cross Street, including land and
buildings, exceeds £100,000.

The whole of the works have been executed by Mr. Brassey, the Contractor,
under the direction of Mr. James Baylis, the resident Engineer, at the
joint expense of the four Railway Companies whose lines unite in
Shrewsbury.

The Railway to Chester was first opened October 12th, 1848.  The line to
Birmingham, November 12th, 1849.  The line to Hereford was opened to
Ludlow, April, 1852; and throughout, October 31st, 1853.

Turning on the left, immediately opposite the entrance to the Railway
Station, we pass on the same side, the Road leading across the Raven
Meadow to Mardol.  This meadow is now converted into a spacious and
convenient



SMITHFIELD, OR CATTLE MARKET,


a great boon to the town, inasmuch as the Fairs were previously held in
the open streets, to the great annoyance, in point of cleanliness and
convenience, of inhabitants and passengers.

The works with the site cost about £13,000, and are capable of affording
accommodation for 700 horses, (with extensive trial grounds for the
same), 1,400 cattle, 5,000 sheep, and 1,000 pigs, with suitable
receptacles for sheep and cattle coming to town previously to the fairs
which occur on the alternate Tuesdays in every month.

Here are also held the Agricultural Shows, which are considered to equal
those of most places where similar exhibitions have been established; and
a Great Horse Fair is held annually in March.

A little further on the right, we pass the



RAILWAY BRIDGE


over Cross Street, a piece of beautiful brick-masonry, and approach the
river Severn, on the margin of which are



THE SHREWSBURY WATER-WORKS,


established in 1830, in 347 shares of £50 each, for the purpose of
affording the inhabitants a constant supply of river water, at a
reasonable rate.

The Town is also gratuitously supplied with excellent spring water, from
a fine spring called Broadwell, in a field near Crow Meole, distant about
two miles, conducted by pipes to conduits placed in convenient situations
in the principal streets.

On the right-hand side are



THE ROYAL BATHS,


and immediately beyond, on the same side, stands



BENBOW PLACE,


the birth-place of the renowned John Benbow, Vice-Admiral of the Blue;
the details of whose gallant bravery are so familiarly known to all as to
render their recapitulation here unnecessary.

Proceeding a short distance along Coton Hill, we soon reach another of
the



RAILWAY BRIDGES,


from which, on the one side, we obtain a good view of the Chester Railway
as far as Hencott Bridge, and on the other side, a comprehensive view of
the various Railway Buildings, backed by a beautiful prospect of the
Town, St. Michael’s Church, the Castle and its wooded Mount, Free
Schools, Spires of St. Mary, and St. Alkmond. {53}

Retracing our steps, we gain, as we proceed, not unpleasing views of
other portions of the town and its public buildings, and then passing
along Cross Street, under the Railway Bridge, traverse the lengthened and
unsightly suburb of the Castle Foregate, to



ST. MICHAEL’S CHURCH,


a neat brick structure, in the Grecian style, erected at an expense
scarcely exceeding £2000 (raised by subscription,) and consecrated on
24th August, 1830, as a chapel of ease to St. Mary’s church.

                     [Picture: St. Michael’s Church]

The plan is oblong, and consists of a nave, side aisles, an elliptical
recess for the altar, and a western tower.  The interior is entered on
the north and south, and is lighted by three circular-headed windows on
either side.  Over the side-aides are galleries, the sittings in which
are free; and at the west end is a spacious one for the use of poor
children, in which stands a small organ, the gift of the late Rev. W. G.
Rowland, M.A., Minister of St. Mary’s.  The same gentleman also most
munificently adorned the windows of the chancel with fine stained glass,
executed by Mr. David Evans, of this town, representing the Nativity,
after Corregio; the Annunciation, after Guido; and the Presentation in
the Temple, after Rubens.  To the same unbounded liberality, the
parishioners are indebted for the substantial service of communion plate,
the peal of six bells which hang in the tower, and the erection of the
adjacent schoolrooms for the poor children of this portion of the parish.
The edifice contains 800 sittings, 620 of which are free, and has
recently undergone alterations by which additional “sittings” are
obtained for the already large and increasing population of the district.
The judicious and economical arrangements of the burial ground merit the
attentive consideration of every visitor.

It would ill beseem us to pass, without honourable mention, the talents
of our ingenious townsman, Mr. David Evans, who, by unwearied exertions,
and consummate skill, has raised the art of glass-staining to a degree of
perfection unequalled in modern times, and nearly approaching, if not
entirely equalling, the rich and mellow tints of the “royal glass” of
ancient days.  The numerous and singularly beautiful specimens of his
elaborate labours, visible in the inimitable restorations of the splendid
glass of Winchester and Lichfield Cathedrals, the churches of St. Mary,
St. Michael, St. Chad, St. George, the Abbey, and domestic chapels of the
nobility and gentry, in almost every part of the kingdom, speak, however,
his merits more forcibly to the correct eye and refined taste, than whole
volumes of our feeble encomiums. {56}

Returning along the Castle Foregate, the more remarkable objects are the
Shrewsbury and Ellesmere Canal, the Manufactory of linen-thread, the Coal
Wharfs, the Gas-Works, and the Goods and Coal Depôt of the Railway, the
New Meeting House of the Wesleyan Reformers, and Buildings of the
Freehold Land Society.

Passing up Howard Street, on the left-hand side of which is the New
Butter and Cheese Market, we approach



THE COUNTY GAOL,


erected in 1793, on the principles of the benevolent Howard, after a
design by Haycock, of Shrewsbury, at an expense of £30,000.  The building
is of brick, and is entered by a massive free-stone gate, on either side
of which is a lodge.  Over the gateway is a fine bust of Howard, by
Bacon.  Immediately behind is the governor’s house; an octagonal chapel
occupies the centre; and the remainder of the structure is divided into
four principal courts, with several smaller ones, around which are
cloisters, with sleeping rooms above for the prisoners, and cells for the
condemned and refractory.  The male and female prisoners are kept apart,
and distributed into classes.  On the eastern side is the Infirmary,
detached from the other buildings.  A strong and lofty brick wall
encompasses the whole.

The entire structure is strong, spacious, airy, well supplied with water,
and every other necessary; and in point of situation for salubrity and
beauty, vies with any of the adjoining eminences.

An admirable institution, supported by voluntary benevolence, entitled
“The Prison Charities,” has subsisted within the walls for nearly fifty
years, and has been productive of the most beneficial results.  Its
objects are to enable debtors and criminal prisoners, of deserving
conduct, to provide by their industry for their better maintenance during
confinement, and to furnish them with a seasonable supply of money and
tools, for immediate use on their restoration to society.

Nearly opposite the Gaol is a



BRIDGE


consisting of two timber arches, 85 feet clear span each, on the bow and
string principle, which carries the public walk called



“THE DANA”


over the Railway Station, along the base of the Castle to the Street
opposite the Free Schools.  From the Dana walk a good view of the Station
House and Railway is obtained, bounded by a long extent of the adjacent
country in the back-ground.

In this direction however we must not proceed, but passing along the
terrace on the south-east side of the Gaol, continue our walk on “the
gentle Severn’s sedgy bank,” at the base of a steep and rugged declivity,
most picturesquely planted and crowned with the Castle’s “worm-eaten hold
of ragged stone,” and the antique gables of the Council House, and
presenting pleasing views of the venerable Abbey, the adjacent suburb of
the Abbey Foregate, and the massive and really grand



RAILWAY VIADUCT


over the river Severn, consisting of 7 elliptical arches, 45 feet span,
rising 18 feet above the springings.  The Viaduct is quite level
throughout its whole length, in width is 39 feet, and the level of the
rails about 36 feet above the ordinary level of the river.

Passing under an arch of the Viaduct we see immediately before us the
elegant English Bridge, and arrive at



THE WATERLANE GATEWAY,


memorable as the avenue through which the Parliamentary forces were
treacherously admitted into the town, at the siege of Shrewsbury, 22nd
February, 1644–5.

Advancing up this narrow lane, we leave, on the left, the site of



THE DOMINICAN, OR BLACK, FRIARS,


long since cleared of its buildings, and now converted into a wharf,
warehouse, and excellent gardens.  These friars established themselves
here as early as 1222, and assumed as their founder Matilda,
grand-daughter and co-heiress of Walter de Lasci, lord of Ludlow, and
wife of Geoffrey de Joinville, of Vaucoulour.

Edward IV., who, throughout the whole of his reign regarded Shrewsbury
with much affection, selected this religious house as his occasional
residence, and the place in which his Queen was delivered of her second
and third sons, Richard Shrewsbury, (1473–4,) Duke of York, afterwards
murdered in the Tower, and George Plantagenet, who died young.  Many
persons of distinguished rank, who fell in the battle of Shrewsbury,
1403, received interment here.

On levelling the ground in 1823, the foundations of three spacious
apartments, fragments of mullions and pillars, emblazoned tiles, several
skeletons enclosed in rude stone coffins, and great quantities of bones,
were disclosed to view.  The site is now the property of the Corbets of
Sundorne.

The sloping ground rising above the site of this friary, and extending to
the south and south-eastern wall of the town, where the Infirmary and
other houses now stand, was, as we learn from a charter of Henry III.,
dated 1227, confirming the possessions of the Abbey of Shrewsbury, given
by “divers citizens of Salopesbury” to the monks of that house “for the
planting of a vineyard:”—a situation, according to the best writers on
horticulture, eminently adapted to the cultivation of the vine.

Arrived at the top of the Water-lane, we enter, on the left, a
cathedral-like close, in the centre of which the venerable edifice of



ST. MARY’S CHURCH


                       [Picture: St. Mary’s Church]

uprears its “heavenward spire.”  This church, once collegiate, is said to
owe its foundation to Edgar the Peaceable, (959 to 975,) who, at the
suggestion of Archbishop Dunstan, placed in it a dean, seven prebends,
and a parish priest, though there is every probability that the
foundation was antecedent to his reign.  In the Saxon times, it possessed
a landed estate of about 1300 acres, which it continued to hold at the
time of Domesday, but of which it was soon after deprived, by what means
we have no power of ascertaining.  At the dissolution of collegiate
churches, 1 Edw.  VI., the revenues, which consisted chiefly of tithes,
amounted to £42; the greater portion of which was granted in 1550, by
Edward VI., towards the endowment of the Free Schools.

From a very early period this church enjoyed the privilege of a Royal
Free Chapel, exempt from the jurisdiction of the Bishop.  This peculiar
jurisdiction remained till the recent Act of Parliament (1846) restored
it to the Bishop of the Diocese, and was held by lease, at an annual rent
of £1 6s. 8d. of the Corporation, to whom Queen Elizabeth granted it by
charter, dated 23rd May, 1571.  The Minister was usually, though not
necessarily, the lessee, and his style was “Ordinary and Official,
Principal of the Peculiar and Exempt Jurisdiction of the Free Royal
Chapel of the Blessed Virgin Mary.”  In his Court wills were proved,
letters of administration were granted, and all ecclesiastical matters,
arising within the parish and its subordinate chapelries, adjudicated.
The Official also granted marriage licenses, and licenses to the curacies
of St. Mary and its chapelries.

The appointment to the living was vested by Act of Parliament, passed in
1801, in the Corporation, who in their choice are directed to give the
preference to the son of a burgess who has been educated at the Free
School, or to one born in the parish of Chirbury, in this county.  The
Minister is, _ex-officio_, Public Preacher of the town.

The parish of Saint Mary includes about a fourth part of the whole town,
nearly the entire suburb of the Castle Foregate, and extends several
miles into the country.

Within these sacred walls the Pope’s Legatees held their court in 1232,
for the adjustment of the differences subsisting between Henry III. and
Llewellin, Prince of Wales.  In 1642, the unhappy Charles I., during his
residence at the Council-House, attended divine service here, received
the Sacrament, and made solemn protestations of his fidelity to the
principles of the reformed religion.

This fine structure is cruciform, and consists of a nave, side-aisles,
transept, chancel, two chauntry chapels, and a tower at the western end,
crowned with a lofty and elegant spire.  In the architecture three very
distinct styles are conspicuous: the Anglo-Norman of the 12th century, in
the basement of the nave, most of the doors, and other portions; the
lancet style of the 13th century, in the chancel and transept; and the
more obtuse arch of the 15th century, in the clere-story, side-aisles,
chapels, &c. with a few trifling additions of later date.

The dimensions of the church are

                                                    Feet      In.
Length from east to west, including steeple          160        0
Length of transept                                    90        0
Breadth of nave and side-aisles                       50        0
Height of steeple                                    220        2
Height of steeple from the level of the river        300        0

Esteeming this ancient fabric to be the principal ornament of our town,
we deem it necessary to add the following detailed description, which we
trust will prove serviceable to the visitor in his attentive examination
of the building.

The tower is broad and low, the basement of red stone, and the upper
portion of grey, and of the Anglo-Norman and early pointed styles of
architecture.  The entrance is on the west side, through a plain pointed
arch of the very earliest kind, springing from square jambs with regular
impost mouldings, and having an internal arch, nearly triangular,
inserted within the head.  On the opposite eastern side, a very early
pointed arch without mouldings, resting on short round Norman pillars
with indented capitals, communicates with the nave.  Two tiers of small
round-headed windows pierce the lower stories, on all sides except the
east.  The upper story is lighted on each side by two united and handsome
pointed windows, bisected by single mullions, forming quatrefoil heads,
and divided by transoms in the middle.  A facia, charged with roses, and
terminating at the angles in projecting grotesque heads, ornaments the
upper and lower portions of this story, which is finished with a plain
embattled parapet, and crocketed pinnacles at the corners.  From the
summit of the tower rises an octagonal spire, “fine by degrees, and
beautifully less,” pierced on alternate sides, with three tiers of
tabernacled openings, and crowned with an open flower, cross and vane.
In the tower is a peal of ten bells, the eight largest of which are
extremely melodious.  This beautiful tower and spire have been thoroughly
repaired and restored at considerable cost, raised by subscription, under
the superintendence of Mr. S. Pountney Smith, of this town, whose skill,
judgment, and taste, in ecclesiastical architecture, are worthy of the
highest praise.

The nave and side-aisles, externally in the pointed style of the 15th
century, and of grey stone, are entered on the north and south-west by
beautiful semicircular arches, adorned with chevron, lozenged, and
foliated mouldings.  Before the south-west entrance is an ancient porch,
principally of Anglo-Norman architecture; the outer arch of which is
circular, enriched with chevron mouldings, and issues from clustered
columns with foliated capitals.  The interior rib is obtusely pointed and
unadorned.  On each side is a small pointed window, exhibiting specimens
of the earliest rudiments of the mullioned Gothic style, in which have
been lately placed some highly interesting “roundels” of old painted
glass, of German execution, on which are depicted various incidents,
chiefly from the Apocrypha.  The groined ceiling rests on two strong and
plain ribs, crossing in the centre.  Over this is a small chamber, with a
plain pointed window.

A stone porch, entered by a pointed arch, has recently been erected
before the corresponding door, on the north side.

The nave is separated from the side-aisles by four semicircular arches,
overspread with deep-cut early Gothic mouldings, springing from elegant
clustered columns with foliated capitals of varied and beautiful designs.
This union of the round arch and clustered pillar, which belong to such
different æras, is singular and very unusual in our ancient architecture.
Above is a clerestory, which is continued along the walls of the chancel,
lighted by short double windows, bluntly pointed, and bisected by single
mullions.

By the pious munificence of the late Minister, the Rev. W. G. Rowland,
the west end has been enriched by an elegant Organ-screen, {67} in the
style of Henry 7th’s time, designed and executed by Mr. John Carline, of
this town.  Three obtusely pointed arches, overspread with deep-cut
mouldings and richly foliaged spandrils, and separated by intervening
buttresses elaborately adorned with open flowers in relief set in
reticulated divisions, open to the nave and form the lower portion of the
front.  Above which, from a string-course, charged with finely sculptured
heads, flowers, &c. rises the upper part or parapet, consisting of a
series of similar, though smaller arches, divided by slender buttresses,
and filled with the like ornamented reticulations.  Around the soffits of
the larger arches are the following inscriptions, in ancient
church-text:—

    Venite Domino exultemus;
    Rupi salutatis jubilemus;
    Jehovam hymnis concinamus;
    Et grates illi persolvamus—Hallelujah.

    Jehovam virgines laudate,
    Senes et pueri celebrate;
    Psalmis ecclesia sanctorum
    Extollat Dominum Dominorum.

    Laudate carminis clamore,
    Laudate buccinæ clangore,
    Laudate organo sonoro,
    Laudate cymbalis et choro.

This spacious gallery contains a remarkably fine-toned organ, made by
John Harris and John Byfield, 1729.

The beautiful ceiling of the nave is of pannelled oak, richly studded
with elegant and exquisitely carved pendants and foliated bosses, and
merits the most minute attention, not only on account of its elaborate
workmanship, but as being one of the richest and most highly preserved
specimens of its kind now in existence.

The side-aisles are each lighted on the sides by three pointed traceried
windows, with smaller and earlier ones at the western terminations, and
communicate at their eastern extremities with the transept, by
semicircular arches, rising from thick round pillars with indented
capitals.

In the windows of the western ends are figures of St. Andrew and St.
John.  The central window of the north aisle contains some beautiful
stained glass from Holland, depicting the following subjects—Holy Family;
Kneeling figure; Balaam and the Angel; the Donor and patron Saint; Adam
and Eve; Mater Dolorosa; Angel appearing to the Shepherds; Disciples
washing each other’s feet:—Justice; Kneeling figure; a Bishop in grief or
disgrace; the Donor’s Wife and patron Saint.  The windows on either side
are filled with various ecclesiastical subjects.  The central window of
the south-aisle contains part of the history of St. Bernard; that on the
west, the adoration of the Magi; and the east one, St. Helena, Kneeling
figure, and Charlemagne.

A lofty and graceful pointed arch, including in its span the entire
breadth of the nave, rises from richly clustered piers with foliated
capitals, and divides the nave from the ancient choir.  Against the north
pier is a beautiful Stone Pulpit, designed and executed by Mr. S.
Pountney Smith, of this town, and erected by the parishioners as a
Memorial of their late revered Minister, Rev. W. G. Rowland.  Its plan is
an unequal octagon, the sides of which are carved into deep-pointed
arches, springing from round pillars with rich foliated capitals, resting
on a basement of gradually receding mouldings, terminated by a richly
carved boss representing the Saviour preaching.  The trefoil and the
dog-tooth are the prevailing ornaments throughout.  The central panel
towards the south bears a bas-relief of the Crucifixion; the arch on the
east, a statue of St. Peter, and that on the west, St. Paul; the eastern
panel represents the Angels appearing to the Shepherds; the western one,
the Ascension; and the northern arch, the statue of St. John the
Evangelist.

Eastward of this, on each side, is a similar arch of like dimensions,
springing from the same pier.  From these, the wings of the transept,
corresponding in size and style, branch off to the north and south.  In
the eastern wall of each wing are two semicircular arches, those nearest
the choir being larger than the others, and communicating with the
chauntry chapels.  At each extremity of the transept is a fine triple
lancet window, highly enriched with slender shafts, foliated capitals,
and delicate mouldings, and filled with beautiful stained glass.  That at
the north is of a rich and elaborate mosaic design, with oval
compartments, enclosing figures of the Apostles and an escutcheon of the
arms of George III., executed by Mr. David Evans.  That at the south
contains the memorial stained glass to the late Rev. W. G. Rowland,
comprising figures of the Virgin and Child, St. Thomas, and St.
Bartholomew, under rich florid canopies, with groups of angels above,
bearing scrolls with inscriptions.  The side walls are pierced with
narrow lights, in couplets, in a similar but plainer style; one of which,
on the west side of the north transept, contains the Virgin and Child,
under a canopy; whilst the corresponding window in the south transept
contains the arms of France and England quarterly, and the armorial
bearings of the late Bishop Butler, and the alliances of his family.  The
narrow doorways {71} are semicircular, rising from round pillars with
foliated capitals, and enriched with a moulding, consisting of a round
branch, swelling at intervals into lozenged panels, charged with roses.
Under the triple lancet window of the south transept is a large and bold
Gothic monument, in three compartments, to the family of Lloyd, and to
the widow of the late Bishop Butler: and around the walls of the north
transept are placed the splendid Gothic monuments to



THE REV. J. B. BLAKEWAY,


                [Picture: Monument to Rev. J. B. Blakeway]

and the families of Dukes, Parry, and Hughes.

The following is the inscription on the former:—

                        TO THE MEMORY OF THE REVEREND
                     JOHN BRICKDALE BLAKEWAY, M.A. F.S.A.
                   THIRTY-ONE YEARS ORDINARY AND OFFICIAL,
                AND THIRTY-TWO YEARS MINISTER OF THIS PARISH,
                           THIS MONUMENT IS ERECTED
              BY THE VOLUNTARY SUBSCRIPTION OF HIS PARISHIONERS
                   AS A TRIBUTE OF RESPECT FOR HIS TALENTS,
                           ESTEEM FOR HIS VIRTUES,
               AND GRATITUDE FOR HIS LONG AND FAITHFUL SERVICES
                         AS THEIR FRIEND AND PASTOR.
                  HE DIED THE TENTH DAY OF MARCH, MDCCCXXVI,
                              AGED SIXTY YEARS.

These exquisite specimens of monumental skill, (together with many others
in various parts of the edifice,) unrivalled in chaste elegance of
design, and richness of execution, are the masterly productions of Mr.
John Carline.

[Picture: Triple lancet window] The chancel is elevated above the rest of
the church, and is filled with carved oak stalls recently erected for the
scholars of the Free Grammar School.  It has on each side a narrow
pointed arch, with deep mouldings rising from clustered pillars, opening
to the chauntry chapels.  On the north side near the richly decorated
altar, is a beautiful and uncommon TRIPLE LANCET WINDOW; the central
arch, remarkably acute, rising far above the lateral ones, and resting
internally on two slender insulated columns, with capitals richly
decorated with a combination of heads and foliage.  These ornaments are
continued as a frieze to the wall, and from the imposts project busts of
monsters.  This window contains some remarkably fine and highly finished
stained glass, representing the history of the life of St. Bernard, said
to be by Albert Durer, or at all events of his age.  Another portion of
this glass is in the central window of the south aisle of the nave.  The
great eastern window occupies the whole extremity of the chancel.  Its
arch is broad and inelegant, divided by clumsy mullions and tracery, and
exhibits a specimen of the debased style of church architecture of the
Elizabethan sera.  In this window is the curious and beautiful ancient
stained glass which filled the east window of Old St. Chad’s Church,
prior to its demolition, and which was presented to this church in 1791.
The subject is that favourite one of the old glass-stainers—the Genealogy
of Christ from Jesse.  Jesse is represented reclining in sleep; from his
loins springs a vine, which overspreading the whole window, encloses in
its branches the several kings his descendants.  In the lower
compartments are figures of three knights banneret, and three ladies,
kneeling under foliated tabernacles; the former habited in hawberks and
yellow surcoats, charged with a lion rampant gules.  Underneath is an
inscription, requesting our prayers for “Monsr. John de Charleton and
Dame Hawis, sa companion,” from which, and from the armorial bearings, we
learn that this exquisite piece of ancient art was set up by the great
Sir John de Charleton, lord of Powis, and must have been executed between
4 Edward II., (1310,) when he was married to Hawise Gadarn, the heiress
of the ancient Princes of Powis, and 1353, the year of his death.  It has
been conjectured that this glass was originally presented to the Grey
Friars, in this town, to which religious house Sir John and his wife were
great benefactors, and that it was removed to St. Chad’s at the
dissolution—a singular instance of so fragile a material surviving the
destruction of two vast and substantial edifices.  The whole of this
window has lately been thoroughly and most judiciously restored.  The
clerestory windows are filled with figures of Apostles and Angels.

On the north side of the chancel is the vestry, recently erected in the
Norman style, the windows of which are filled with “roundels” of old
German and Flemish glass, exquisitely finished; and immediately adjoining
is the chauntry chapel of St. Catharine; in the east wall of which is a
window of very uncommon form, consisting of a pointed arch, within which
is a trefoil, containing, in stained glass, Christ seated on a throne
amid the clouds and the dead rising to judgment.  Immediately beneath is
a round-headed window, in which is a kneeling figure in stained glass of
the Virgin Mary, with angels hovering over her head, bearing in their
hands a crown.  On the north side is a large window, of three lights,
with perpendicular tracery, containing fine old German glass representing
the Crucifixion; Saint and kneeling figure; Judas betraying Christ; and
St. Lambert and kneeling figure.  This chapel is now used as a
Baptistery, and the beautiful ANCIENT STONE FONT stands in the centre, on
a rich pavement of modern encaustic tiles.  Against the north wall, an
alabaster slab, engraved with figures of a warrior and lady, commemorates
Nicholas Stafford, Esq. and Katherine, his wife, the reputed founders of
this chapel, who died 1463, which formerly lay under the arched recess in
the north wall.

             [Picture: Ancient Stone Font, St. Mary’s Church]

Over the door leading into the vestry is the monument, in white marble,
erected by subscription, to the memory of the brave ADMIRAL BENBOW, a
native of the parish.  [Picture: Monument to Admiral Benbow] It
represents an obtuse pyramid of black marble, against which leans an oval
medallion full faced bust of the Admiral, surrounded with anchor, flags,
and cannon; and below a delicately sculptured representation in
bas-relief of a naval fight: underneath is the following inscription:—

                ERECTED BY PUBLIC SUBSCRIPTION TO COMMEMORATE
                               THE SERVICES OF
                 JOHN BENBOW, ESQ. VICE-ADMIRAL OF THE BLUE,
                         A SKILFUL AND DARING SEAMAN
             WHOSE HEROIC EXPLOITS LONG RENDERED HIM THE BOAST OF
                              THE BRITISH NAVY,
             AND STILL POINT HIM OUT AS THE NELSON OF HIS TIMES.
            HE WAS BORN AT COTON HILL IN THIS PARISH, AND DIED AT
                             KINGSTON IN JAMAICA,
                      NOVEMBER 4TH, 1702, AGED 51 YEARS,
                  OF WOUNDS RECEIVED IN HIS MEMORABLE ACTION
                 WITH A FRENCH SQUADRON OFF CARTHAGENA IN THE
                                 WEST INDIES,
             FOUGHT ON THE 19TH AND FIVE FOLLOWING DAYS OF AUGUST
                                IN THAT YEAR.

Attached to the south side of the chancel is a large and lofty chapel, in
ancient times variously called “The Leybourne Chapel” and “The Trinity
Aisle.”  There is every probability that it was founded about the year
1300, by one of the Leybournes of Berwick, as a place of sepulture for
the family, and was subsequently enlarged into its present form by the
Drapers’ Company of the town, soon after their incorporation in 1461.  In
the south-east wall are three stone sedilia, with canopied arches; and on
the north side of the altar, a small locker, once used for keeping the
Eucharist.  A fine pointed arch, in the pure style of the 14th century,
communicates with the chancel through the north-east wall.  Under this is
an altar, tomb, (probably of SIMON DE LEYBOURNE, lord of Berwick, who
died between 1300 and 1315,) [Picture: Altar-tomb, Simon de Leybourne]
the sides of which are adorned with canopied niches, formerly containing
figures; and on the table reclines the figure of a knight, cross-legged,
and in chain armour.  In this tomb the headless corpse of Thomas Percy,
Earl of Worcester, “ill-spirited Worcester,” who was taken prisoner at
the battle of Shrewsbury, 1403, and beheaded, is believed to have been
interred.  The windows on the south side contain figures in stained
glass:—commencing eastward the subjects are—St. Christopher, Count Horne,
St. Catherine:—Bishop, Count Horne, St. John, St. Catherine, St.
Barbara:—St. John the Baptist, Angel, Count Horne, Joseph of Arimathea,
and the dead Saviour, St. Anne, Angel, Countess Horne:—Bishop, Countess
Horne, St. James, with armorial bearings of the family of Horne.  Several
of these figures are old, the rest are modern, executed by Mr. D. Evans,
after designs by P. Corbet, Esq., of this town.  Underneath which is a
rich Gothic monument to Master WIGRAM.

                   [Picture: Monument to Master Wigram]

                          MAN KNOWETH NOT HIS TIME.
             AT THE WEST SIDE OF THIS CHURCHYARD ARE INTERRED THE
                              MORTAL REMAINS OF
                              HEATHCOTE WIGRAM,
             SECOND SON OF MONEY WIGRAM, ESQ. AND MARY HIS WIFE,
                    OF WOODHOUSE, IN THE COUNTY OF ESSEX,
              HE WAS A PUPIL IN THE ROYAL FREE GRAMMAR SCHOOL OF
            THIS TOWN AND WAS DROWNED WHILE BATHING IN THE SEVERN
                  SEPTEMBER I, MDCCCXXXVIII, AGED XIV YEARS.
            THE CONDUCT OF THIS AMIABLE YOUTH HAD GREATLY ENDEARED
                        HIM TO HIS FAMILY AND FRIENDS
            HIS NATURAL TALENTS IMPROVED BY SUCCESSFUL APPLICATION
                HAD ALREADY GIVEN PROMISE OF FUTURE EXCELLENCE
              WHEN HIS HEAVENLY FATHER CALLED HIM AWAY FROM THIS
                            EARTHLY STATE OF TRIAL
             FOR THE EYES OF THE LORD ARE UPON THEM THAT FEAR HIM
           AND HOPE IN HIS MERCY TO DELIVER THEIR SOUL FROM DEATH.
                 THIS MONUMENT WAS ERECTED BY HIS MASTERS AND
                                SCHOOL-FELLOWS
              TO THE MEMORY OF HIM WHOM THEY LOVED AND LAMENTED
            AND FOR THE CONTINUAL ADMONITION OF THE YOUNG IN THIS
                           CONGREGATION THAT THEY—
            REMEMBER NOW THEIR CREATOR IN THE DAYS OF THEIR YOUTH.

Against the east wall are large gothic monuments to John Jeudwine Esq.
and Thomas Sutton, Esq. and between them is the statue erected by his
pupils, at a cost of eight hundred guineas, to the memory of the late
BISHOP BUTLER.  The figure is full-length, clothed in the Episcopal
robes, sitting in an easy and graceful attitude; the right hand hanging
over the chair, and the left supporting the head, which is leaning in
thought.  It is of pure white Carrara marble, and was sculptured by F. H.
Baily, Esq. R.A.  The pedestal which supports the statue is of
dove-coloured marble from the Clee Hill, and bears the inscription
below:—

                        SAMVELI BUTLER, S.T.P.  R.S.S.
                            EPISCOPO LICHFIELDENSI
                      PRAESVLI PIO DILIGENTI DESIDERATO
                   PRAECEPTORI IN PRIMIS DOCTO AC SOLLERTI
                     CVIVS FAVSTIS ADMINISTRATA CONSILIIS
                           SCHOLA REGIA SALOPIENSIS
                LITERARVM STVDIIS LAVDEM OMNEM SVPERGRESSA EST
                  DISCIPVLI MVNICIPES AMICI ET FAVTORES EIVS
                             VIRO EGREGIE MERITO
                      HONORIS EXEMPLIQVE CAVSA POSVERVNT
                               A.S.  MDCCCXLIV.

                    [Picture: Statue to Bishop Butler]

Dispersed in various parts of the edifice will be found many monuments of
modern date, some of which bear elegant inscriptions.

The northernmost of the windows immediately above, is filled with stained
glass representing our Blessed Saviour receiving young children, and
figures of Charlemagne and Edgar below, and in the window adjoining, is
the Adoration of the Magi, and figures of Alfred and David below, the
latter the gift of Daniel Rowland, Esq. brother of the late Incumbent.

On the exterior western wall of the tower are some quaint verses,
recording the death of Robert Cadman, who, on 2nd February, 1739, rashly
attempted to slide down on his breast along a rope, extended from the
summit of the spire to the opposite side of the river.  The rope being
drawn too tight snapped asunder as he was passing over the Dominican
Friars, and he fell lifeless on the ice-bound earth.

On the south-west side of the church-yard lies Lieutenant Thomas
Anderson, one of the last persons executed for adherence to the Stuart
family.  He was tried at Worcester for desertion, and shot here on 11th
December, 1759.

On the west side, “grav’d in the hollow ground,” close to the tomb of the
Rev. J. B. Blakeway, also repose the ashes of that amiable man, and
indefatigable antiquary, Mr. David Parkes, who died 8th May, 1833, of
whom there is a mural tablet in the Trinity Chapel.  And also on the
north-east side, those of the late zealous incumbent, the Rev. J. O.
Hopkins, M.A. over which is a stone bearing the following inscription:—

                          JOHN OLIVER HOPKINS, M.A.
               INCUMBENT OF THIS CHURCH, DIED AUGUST 1ST, 1853,
                              IN HIS 43RD YEAR.

            “BE YE ALSO READY FOR IN SUCH AN HOUR AS YE THINK NOT,
                   THE SON OF MAN COMETH.”—MATT. XXIV. 44.

Westward of the church-yard are



ST. MARY’S ALMSHOUSES,


the safe asylum of feeble age and decent poverty.  This foundation arose
from the benevolence of the Worshipful Company of Drapers of this town,
at a very early period; and was remodelled during the wardenship, of that
company, of Degory Watur, a worthy burgess and draper of Shrewsbury, in
the days of Henry IV., who, is believed (though whether on sufficient
grounds is uncertain,) to have charitably devoted a portion of his
substance to the erection and endowment of an almshouse, for thirteen
poor persons of both sexes.  This beneficent man is said to have “dwellyd
in the almeshowse hall amongst the poor,” and a truly affecting sight
must it have been to behold the pious old man, white with “the silver
livery of advised age,” deprived of sight, and bowed with the weight of
ninety-six years, daily accompanying the participators of his bounty to
St. Mary’s church, where he “wold kneele amongst them in a fayre longe
pewe made for them and hym selfe,” and offer up the grateful incense of
thanksgiving to that Eternal Being, with whom there is no respect of
persons.  The good Degory

    “Even in the downfall of his mellowed years,
    When Nature brought him to the door of death,”

forgot not the objects of his charity, but in his will, dated on the day
of his decease, 28th July, 1477, devised certain lands to the Wardens of
the Drapers’ Company to “sufficientlie susteyne poore people in St. Mary
Allmeshowse.”  Other charitable individuals made subsequent additions to
the endowment.

The almshouses originally stood within the churchyard, and were confined,
unwholesome, and highly incommodious to the thoroughfare.  In 1825 they
were entirely removed, and the present comfortable habitations erected on
the opposite side of the street, by the Drapers’ Company, at an expense
of nearly £3000.  The houses are sixteen in number, and the inmates, who
must be parishioners of St. Mary’s, are appointed by the Drapers’
Company, and supported by them, at an annual expense of upwards of £100.

In an ancient timber house in the south-west corner of the church-yard,
is



THE DRAPERS’ HALL.


This curious and spacious apartment retains many features of the good old
fashioned days.  Elevated on a dais, “richlie dyghte withe blazon’d
tyle,” stands the massive oaken table at which the Company hold their
meetings, and below at right angles, is another table, which in former
times was wont to groan beneath the solid cheer, with which the worthy
drapers feasted their tenants and dependents.  A rudely carved muniment
chest occupies the lower end, and portraits of the excellent Degory Watur
and his spouse, and of King Edward IV.  “The Royal Founder of their
Companie,” decorate the dark and gloomy wainscot.

The Drapers were incorporated by Charters of Edward IV. and James I. and
their Company is recognized by several subsequent Acts of Parliament.
Seven years’ apprenticeship to a member of the company is the necessary
qualification for admission, though foreigners may be admitted on payment
of a fine, at the discretion of the company.  Their income, which chiefly
arises from lands originally purchased by the voluntary contributions of
the members, is considerable, and is expended in the support of the
inmates of St. Mary’s Almshouse, in liberal subscriptions to the
charitable institutions of the town, and in relief to the widows and
families of deceased members.

The traffic in Welsh woollen-cloths, the staple trade of the place during
three centuries, is now very inconsiderable, the market formerly held
here every Thursday having been long since removed to Welshpool and
Newtown in Montgomeryshire.

The next object which demands our attention is



THE SALOP INFIRMARY. {86}


    “Here all have kindness, most relief—for some
    Is cure complete,—it is the SUFFERS’ HOME.”

                        [Picture: Salop Infirmary]

This excellent institution was established in 1747, for the humane
purpose of affording skilful medical assistance to the suffering poor,
and is most munificently supported by the voluntary subscriptions and
benefactions of the county.  According to the last report the total
number of persons who have received the benefit of this useful charity
since its commencement, are,—In-patients 65204; whereof 32298 have been
cured, and 25156 relieved; Out-patients 138039, of whom 98376 have been
cured, and 24700 relieved.  The yearly number of patients is 1277
in-patients, and 4835 out-patients.  Several of the physicians and
surgeons of the town most humanely afford their valuable advice and skill
gratuitously; and in order that medical aid may always be ready in cases
of emergency, a surgeon, retained at a salary, is constantly resident in
the house.  The pecuniary and ordinary concerns of the institution are
superintended by a board of directors, consisting of eight trustees, the
deputy treasurer, and secretary.  The domestic economy is regulated by a
matron.  Two of the subscribers, weekly attend as house-visitors.  The
Chaplain the Rev. J. Lewis reads prayers daily and visits the sick in the
wards.  A treasurer is also annually appointed, who, on the anniversary
day in the Hunt week, is accompanied to church by the subscribers and
patrons of the charity, where, after a sermon, a collection is made in
aid of the funds; the plates on this occasion, being held by two ladies
and two gentlemen of rank or opulence.

The house surgeon is allowed to take three pupils at a premium of 20
Guineas to himself, and 200 Guineas to the Infirmary, which entitles the
pupil to board and residence for five years.  Attendance at this hospital
is recognized by the Royal College of Surgeons, and the Apothecaries’
Company, London.

There is a Library of about 3000 volumes, to which the best new medical
works are yearly added by purchase.

The present building was erected in 1830, on the site of the Old
Infirmary, after a design by Mr. Haycock, of this town, at an expense of
£18,735 18s. 10d. of which £12,994 1s. 3d. was raised by subscription,
and the remainder disbursed from the funded property of the charity.

It is constructed of freestone, in the Grecian style, is 170 feet in
length by 80 feet in height, and has a handsome portico in the centre,
supported by Doric pillars.  The disposition of the interior is adequate
to the accommodation of from 150 to 160 in-patients, and comprises four
stories.  The various offices, in number twenty-two, are arranged in the
basement; the ground floor is appropriated to the board-room, dispensary,
rooms for the admission of patients, the house-surgeon and matron’s
apartments, and two wards for surgical cases; the first floor has seven
wards for male patients, with day-room, scullery, and baths; the upper
story contains a spacious operation room, with wards for female patients
on each side; and in the attics are four other wards, with nurses’ rooms,
&c.  A staircase, at either end, communicates with spacious galleries
extending the length of each story.  A proper ventilation is kept up
through the whole structure, and an uniform temperature preserved by a
patent hot-water apparatus, which likewise affords a constant supply of
warm water.  The walls of the board-room are decorated with the portraits
of Sir Rowland Hill, Bart., General Lord Hill, and Lord Clive, the
armorial bearings of the successive treasurers, and the tables of
benefactions.

The spacious terrace on the eastern side, commands an extensive view of
unequalled richness and beauty.  The eye, after dwelling on the nearer
objects of the rugged declivities of the Castle Mount,—the Railway
Viaduct over the Severn,—the majestic ruins of the Abbey,—the stately
grandeur of the White Hall,—the elegant Column,—and the venerable church
of St. Giles—wanders uninterruptedly over an extensive tract of fertile
and finely wooded country, bounded by the long ridge of Haughmond Hill,
the Wrekin, the Acton Burnell, Frodesley, and Stretton Hills.

Opposite St. Mary’s turnstile, at the corner of Church Street, stands



JONES’S MANSION,


the front of which is now obscured by modern erections, though portions
of its lofty gables are still visible from the street.  This house was
built by Thomas Jones, Esq., called the _Rich Jones_, (the uncle of Sir
Thomas Jones, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,) who, after serving
the office of Bailiff six times, was appointed by Charles I., in 1638,
the first Mayor of Shrewsbury.  In 1624 he also served the office of
Sheriff of the county.  Subsequently the mansion became the residence of
the Chief Justice Jones.  In 1642, during Charles I. stay in Shrewsbury,
the Duke of York was lodged here, and Prince Rupert also made it his
residence after the battle of Worcester.

In the adjacent street, Dogpole, is



THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC INSTITUTE,


instituted with the object of affording to the young men of the town the
means of acquiring general and scientific knowledge, by the formation of
a library, delivery of Lectures, and establishment of Classes for French,
Germany Drawing, &c., and an opportunity of spending their leisure hours
profitably in a Reading Room supplied with the London and local
Newspapers, and several of the leading Reviews, Magazines, and
periodicals devoted to mechanical and artistical subjects.  There is,
also, a Debating Society connected with the Institution.  The
subscription is 15s. per annum, with free admission to the Lectures,
Library, and Reading Room, the latter of which is open from 12 at noon to
10 o’clock at night, every day, (Sundays excepted.)

Behind the wainscot of the dining-room of a house situate a little below
the Institute in Dogpole, now the property and residence of Dr. Henry
Johnson, Senior Physician to the Salop Infirmary, and known in ancient
documents by the name of



“THE OLDE HOUSE,”


was recently discovered an ancient painting, on canvas, fixed upon a
board forming the mantelpiece over the fire-place of the room.  In the
centre is a shield of arms, France and England quarterly, surmounted by a
royal crown, and on either side a pomegranate and Tudor rose (white and
red conjoined), twice repeated.  The ground of the whole dark-maroon,
ornamented or damasked with white wavy feathery embellishments.  Above,
on the plaster of the wall, is a rude painting of heavy scroll-work
ornaments; and it is thought that the rest of the walls, if the wainscot
were removed, would be found covered with similar paintings.

In the absence of all positive evidence, conjectures can only be hazarded
as to the cause of these arms, &c. having been placed here.

One thing, however, is certain that they are connected, in some way with
Queen Mary, daughter of Henry VIII. and Queen Katherine of Arragon,
inasmuch as the pomegranate was first introduced as a royal badge of
England, upon Katherine’s marriage with prince Arthur, son of Henry VII.
Now if we consider this painting contemporary with an inscription on the
wainscot of the adjoining drawing-room, “PETRVS ROBERTS M M SECO 1553,”
and interpret it thus, “PETRVS ROBERTS MARIÆ MATERNITATEM SECO, 1553.  I
Peter Roberts decide (the question of) the maternity or legitimacy of
Mary, 1553.”  Then we may regard it as a loyal demonstration on Mary’s
accession to the English throne by some one of those many friends and
adherents who so warmly sympathised in her early adversity, in the
unjustifiable degradation of her royal mother and her own consequent
exclusion from the succession to the throne.

If, however, the painting is considered to be anterior in time to the
inscription on the wainscot, and such really appears to be the case from
the style of the wainscot, then it may be connected with the possibility
of the Court of the Marches of Wales, over which Mary presided in 1525,
with the title of “Princess of Wales,” having been held here, since the
Council House, where the Court usually sat afterwards, was not built till
1530; or it may be the memorial of an unrecorded visit of Queen Mary to
our town; or the residence of one of her household, or of some member of
the Council, amongst both of whom were many Cambrian names, and the
following,—Ap Rice, Baldwyn, Basset, Bromley, Burnell, Burton, Cotton,
Dod, Egerton, Pigot, Rocke, Sydnour, Salter, more or less connected with
Shrewsbury; or it may have been the mansion of one of the many Welsh
families of distinction, with whom Mary formed an intimacy during her
residence in the Marches; or, as the crest of the Rocke family still
remains on the leaden water-piping, and who in later times are remembered
to have resided therein, it may have been the mansion of Anthony Rocke,
who was a servant of Queen Katherine, and a legatee in her will to the
amount of £20; and of whom the Princess Mary thus writes in one of her
letters:—“For although he be not my servant, yet because he was my
mother’s, and is an honest man, as I think, I do love him well, and would
do him good.”

Which of these guesses may be the true solution, we are unable at present
to decide.

We now pass down Church Street to



ST. ALKMUND’S CHURCH,


                     [Picture: St. Alkmund’s Church]

founded in the early part of the 10th century, by Ethelfleda, daughter of
the great Alfred, and lady of Mercia, who endowed it with eleven manors.
Edgar the Peaceable added other lands and possessions, and placed here a
dean and ten prebends.  At the time of Domesday the church held in
Shrewsbury twenty-one burgesses, twelve houses for the canons, two of the
hundred hides, for which the city paid Dane-geld, besides nine of the
above manors, (the other two having been unjustly wrested from it, and
fallen into lay hands,) in all, about 4020 acres, of which 620 were in
demesne, and a rent of £8 8s. 8d. received for the remainder, which, with
other rents of the amount of 13s. 8d. produced a revenue rather exceeding
£500 of modern currency.  Part of these estates, held of the church by
Godebold, a Norman priest, and subsequently by his son, Robert, persons
in great esteem with our Norman earls, were involved by some means in the
confiscation of the property of the last Earl, Robert de Belesme, and
fell into the hands of Richard de Belmeis, Bishop of London, to whom
Henry I. had entrusted the government of Shropshire.  On the death of
this prelate in 1127, the king granted them to the Bishop’s nephew,
Richard de Belmeis, also Bishop of London, and canon of this church.  In
his possession they did not long continue, for in 1147 he effected the
dissolution of the college of St. Alkmund, and with the consent of King
Stephen and Pope Eugenius III., transferred his own and all the other
prebendal estates, to augment his brother Philip de Belmeis’s recent
foundation of Lilleshall Abbey, in this county, by which means the
benefice sank from a collegiate establishment into a poor vicarage.

After the dissolution of Lilleshall Abbey, the vicarage continued in the
crown until 1628, when Charles I. sold it to Rowland Heylin, Alderman of
London, a zealous member of a society for founding lectureships in
populous towns, and augmenting small livings.  On the suppression of this
society in 1663, on the supposition of its being favourable to
puritanical principles, St. Alkmund’s, with the other advowsons,
purchased by the society, became vested in the crown, in whose patronage
it still remains.

The old church was a spacious structure, exhibiting specimens of
ecclesiastical architecture, from the Anglo-Norman period to the middle
of the sixteenth century.  The original form was a cross with nave, side
aisles, transept, chancel, and western tower, but from the subsequent
erections of chauntry chapels, the external elevation was very irregular.
On the sudden fall of St. Chad’s Church, in this town, an unfounded
apprehension of the instability of this curious building was excited and
cherished in the breasts of the parishioners.  Deliberations were
speedily set on foot, and with ill-judged haste it was resolved to
demolish the venerable structure, and erect a new church of more
contracted dimensions on a part of the site.  The strength and firmness
of the masonry of the ancient but undecayed walls presented almost
insurmountable obstacles to the efforts of the workmen employed to rend
them asunder, and convinced the parishioners, when too late, of their
premature folly. {97}

The present church was opened for divine service on 8th November, 1795,
and cost in the erection £4000.  It is of freestone, in the style usually
denominated Modern-Gothic.  The interior, though destitute of the solemn
majesty of gothic edifices, is handsomely fitted up, and well arranged
for the accommodation of a numerous congregation.  In the gallery at the
west end, is a small but well-toned organ, by Gray of London, erected by
subscription in 1823.  The east window contains some modern stained
glass, emblematical of Evangelical Faith, painted by the elder Eglinton.

Of the old church the only portion which escaped destruction was the
western steeple, erected probably as late as the Dissolution.  It
consists of a slender, but well-proportioned square tower of three
chambers, flanked by light double angular buttresses, gracefully
diminishing in their ascent, and finished on the summit by broaches or
semi-pyramidal abutments.  From this rises a spire of the finest
proportions, brought to an exquisitely taper point, and crowned by an
open flower.  This has recently been repaired and restored by Mr. S. P.
Smith.  Under the tower, an elegant pointed arch, recessed within a
square opening, leads to the interior; on each side are the remains of
holy water niches.  Above is a handsome pointed window, with delicate
mullions, containing in ancient stained glass, preserved from the old
church, the arms of France and England quarterly, and those of Richard
Sampson, Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry.  The bell-story contains a
light peal of eight bells, cast by Bryan of Hertford, in 1812, and is
lighted by four semicircular windows.

Of the ancient tombs and monumental brasses which abounded in the old
edifice, none are preserved in the present structure, which contains no
memorial worthy of note, with the exception of a tablet to Chief Justice
Jones, and one to the late Rev. R. Scott, B.D.

The parish comprises only a small part of the town, but contains many
insulated portions of the neighbourhood.

Strong foundations of red stone are extensively visible in the houses and
walls on the north-west side of the church yard, which may possibly be
the remains of the Saxon college.

Immediately adjoining, at the top of the Double Butcher Bow, is a lofty
timber house, conjectured to have been



THE GUILD HOUSE OF THE FRATERNITY OF THE HOLY CROSS,


which anciently existed in the church of St. Alkmund.

                 [Picture: Guild House of the Holy Cross]

This curious tenement, now occupied as several dwellings, forms two sides
of a square, and with the exception of its square windows, entirely of
Gothic architecture of the fifteenth century.

The projecting stories are supported by elegant springers, enriched like
the principal timbers, with carvings of small pointed arches, with
trefoil and other ornaments.  A cloister of obtusely pointed wooden
arches, overspread with rich carvings and delicate mouldings, runs along
the ground-story of the front.

Contiguous to St. Alkmund’s is



ST. JULIAN’S CHURCH.


                      [Picture: St. Julian’s Church]

of whose early foundation in the Saxon times, we possess no particulars.
According to Domesday, it held before the Conquest half a hide of land in
the city.  It was a rectory and royal free chapel with a peculiar
jurisdiction, and appears to have been annexed, at a very early period,
to the chapel of St. Michael, in the castle.  In 1410 the rectory was
granted, amongst other things, by Henry IV., to augment his new
foundation of Battlefield College, and thenceforth this living became a
mere stipendiary curacy.  On the dissolution of that college, St.
Julian’s was granted by the crown, in 3rd Edward VI. to John Capper and
Richard Trevor, and after numerous subsequent transfers, passed into the
family of Prince, from whom it has descended to the present patron, the
Earl of Tankerville.

The parish comprehends the Wyle, the Wyle Cop, and under the Wyle, and
considerable disjointed portions extending wide into the country.

The present church, erected in 1749, on the site of an ancient irregular
structure which had become ruinous, is an oblong Grecian building of
brick and stone.  The interior is handsome and conveniently fitted up.
Four Doric pillars on each side of the nave support the ceiling, which is
curved and decorated with considerable effect with carved foliated
bosses, preserved from the beams of the old church.  Over the side
aisles, and at the west end, are commodious galleries, in the latter of
which is an organ by Fleetwood and Bucer, erected by subscription in
1834.  In the central light of the large Venetian window in the chancel,
is a figure of St. James in ancient stained glass; and in the side lights
are the royal arms, and those of Lichfield and Coventry impaling
Cornwallis.  The galleries on the north and south are lighted by large
circular-headed windows, containing the arms of Queen Elizabeth, the
town, and the families of Bowdler, Prynce, and Bennett.

The only existing portion of the old church is the slender square tower
at the west end.  The basement is of red stone, and has on its eastern
side a remarkably acute and lofty arch opening to the nave.  From this
rises a superstructure of grey stone in the style of the 16th century;
the upper chamber of which is lighted on every side by a broad short
pointed mullioned window.  Above is a frieze of quatrefoil pannels, with
grotesque water-spouts projecting from the angles.  An embattled parapet,
enriched with eight crocketed pinnacles, crowns the summit.  In the tower
are six bells.

On the exterior of the south wall of the tower is a sculptured stone from
the old church, representing St. Juliana within a foliated tabernacle.

The south side of the church was, in 1846, stuccoed over, stone pillars
inserted between the windows, and surmounted with a cornice and stone
parapet.

The church-yard next the street was also enclosed by a pierced parapet
stone wall, and the entire structure substantially repaired at the
expense partly of the parish and of the late Rev. R. Scott.

The edifice contains only one monument of any antiquity; a coarse marble
slab, inscribed in Longo-bardic capitals, to a member of the family of
Trumwin, of Cannock, in Staffordshire.

The modern memorials most worthy of remark, as recording men “useful in
their generation,” are those to Mr. John Allatt, the beneficent founder
of Allatt’s School; Mr. Robert Lawrence, the public-spirited coach
proprietor, to whose exertions we owe the great Holyhead Road, and the
establishment of the first mail coach to this town;—and to the
elegant-minded Hugh Owen, Archdeacon of Salop, one of the learned authors
of the “History of Shrewsbury.”

We now reach



THE TOP OF THE WYLE,


the upper part of the street now called “The Wyle Cop,” which is believed
to have been the part first inhabited by the Britons, and was in the
immediate vicinity of their Prince’s palace, which occupied the site of
Old St. Chad’s church.  After the Saxon invasion the town gradually
increased towards the north, as is evident from the situation of the
churches of St. Alkmund and St. Mary, the former founded in the
beginning, and the latter at the end of the 10th century.

On the right-hand side of the Wyle Cop, three doors below the Lion Hotel,
is an



OLD TIMBER HOUSE,


in which Henry VII. is reported to have lodged during his short stay in
the town, immediately previous to the battle of Bosworth.  For the good
services which Henry experienced from the burgesses on this occasion, he
remitted, on his accession to the throne, ten marks annually for fifty
years, of the fee farm at which they held their town, and exempted them
from all taxes and contributions.  The intercourse which had begun thus
favourably was kept up in after years by Henry, who, with his queen and
son, frequently visited this town, upon which occasions they were feasted
by the Bailiffs in a most royal and hospitable manner.

Opposite to St. Julian’s church is



SHEARMANS’, OR CLOTHWORKERS’ HALL,


an ancient red stone building, of whose original erection no particulars
are now extant.  The high gabled west end fronts the High Street, and
displays a pointed window of the 14th century, long since deprived of its
mullions.  On the east and south sides are remains of similar windows.
The interior, formerly in one apartment, is now converted into a
dwelling-house and warehouses.

The business of the Shearman consisted in dressing the Welsh webs, by
raising the wool on one side.  In the reign of Elizabeth great numbers
were employed in this process; but subsequent discoveries proving it to
be injurious to the texture of the cloth, it was gradually laid aside.
Few, if any, Shearmen now remain in our town.  The precise date of their
incorporation is unknown, though doubtless it was at a very early period.

From entries in their ancient books dated 7th, 8th, and 9th, Edward IV.
we learn that the Company constituted the Guild or Fraternity of the
Blessed Virgin Mary, whose chauntry was in the north aisle of St.
Julian’s Church.  From the same documents we find that it was the custom
on their festival day, to erect in front of their Hall, a May-pole or
green tree, thence called “the Shermen’s Tree;” the bringing in and
fixing of which was accompanied with much festivity and expensive
jollity.  The ceremonies observed on these occasions, doubtless bore
considerable resemblance to those practised at the erection of the
May-pole on May-day, as described by old writers, when

    “Forth goth all the court both most and lest,
    To fetch the floures fresh, and braunch and blome.”

During the reign of Puritanism these pastimes caused great disgust to the
professors of those principles, and strenuous efforts were used to
suppress “the Shermen’s Tree.”  Disturbances consequently ensued, in
which the Bailiffs of the town appear to have espoused the cause of the
Puritans, and even directed their Public Preacher to deliver sermons
against the merriment of our honest forefathers.

Adjoining the south side of the Shearmen’s Hall is a large and curious
old timber house, called



THE OLD POST-OFFICE,


which forms with it a court, entered from the street by a gateway.  These
premises were erected in 1568 by George Proude, draper, bailiff in 1569,
and member of a family formerly of considerable note in our town.

We now approach the only remaining portion of



OLD ST. CHAD’S CHURCH,


consisting of the Lady Chapel on the south side of the choir.  The two
semicircular arches, still visible in the masonry of the outer walls,
communicated with the choir and south transept.  The north-west angle is
flanked by the great south-eastern pier of the central tower, and at the
opposite corner are the remains of a staircase buttress.  The southern
and eastern sides are each lighted by two pointed windows, three of which
are divided by elegant trefoil tracery.  The south-western window is
plainer, and of an earlier date than the rest.  On the outside of the
north wall are three stone stalls, with groined roofs, originally on the
southern side of the altar, and used by the officiating clergy during the
celebration of the mass.  The roof is of a plain oak panelling.

                     [Picture: Old St. Chad’s Church]

This chauntry chapel was first erected in 1496, but having subsequently
fallen into decay was nearly re-edified in 1571, at the expense of
Humphrey Onslow, Esq. of Onslow, in this parish, for the reception of the
altar tomb, (now in the Abbey Church,) of his nephew the Speaker Onslow,
who died at Onslow during a visit to his uncle.  After the Reformation it
acquired the name of the Bishop’s Chancel, from being used as a
consistory court at the visitations.  Its present use is as a receptacle
for the monumental memorials rescued from the wreck of the old church.

This church, when perfect, was a plain heavy, solid pile, totally devoid
of ornamental sculpture on the outer walls, and from its situation on a
commanding eminence, presented from a distance, a fine, solemn,
cathedral-like appearance.  It was cruciform, and comprised a nave, side
aisles, transept, choir, a broad low central tower, and chauntry chapels
north and south of the choir.  The architecture was chiefly of the
Anglo-Norman and lancet styles of the 13th century, with some subsequent
additions of the 15th and 16th centuries. {109}

Early in the summer of 1788 considerable fissures were observed in the
north-western pier of the tower, which continuing to increase, Mr.
Telford was employed to examine and report the cause.  On inspection, it
was discovered that the foundations had been undermined by graves
heedlessly made too near the walls, and that the pier, in consequence,
had given way; that the tower and the whole of the north side of the nave
were in a most dangerous state, and the chief timbers of the roof
decayed.  He recommended that the tower should be immediately taken down,
the pier rebuilt, and the other parts of the fabric properly and
substantially secured.  This reasonable advice through ill-judged economy
was fatally rejected, and a stonemason employed to cut away the infirm
parts of the pier, and to underbuild it, without lessening any of the
incumbent weight of the tower and bells.  The workmen accordingly
commenced, and proceeded in their operations for two days; but on the
third morning, July 9th, 1788, just as the chimes struck four, the
ruinous pier gave way, the tower was instantly rent asunder, and falling
on the roofs of the nave and transept with a tremendous crash, involved
those parts in one indescribable scene of desolation and horror.  Many
portions of the building still remained standing but so great was the
panic occasioned by the catastrophe that they were all immediately taken
down, with the exception of the present chapel.

The collegiate establishment of St. Chad consisted of a dean, ten secular
canons, and two vicars choral, and was founded soon after the subjugation
of Pengwern, in the 8th century, by Offa, king of Mercia, who, as
tradition states, converted the palace of the kings of Powis into his
first church.  In Edward the Confessor’s time, this church held twelve
hides of land, which it retained at the compilation of Domesday.  Between
the years 1086 and 1326, other considerable possessions were acquired by
the college, so that at the dissolution their revenues amounted to the
clear yearly sum of £49 13s.  In 34th Henry VIII. on the apprehension of
a dissolution, the last dean, Sir George Lee, granted a lease of the
deanery, (with the exception of certain tithes previously disposed of) to
Humphrey Onslow, Esq. for sixty-one years, at a rent of £10, and a
payment of £4 6s. 8d. to a curate to celebrate divine service in the
church.  On the dissolution of colleges, 2nd Edward VI., the crown leased
the collegiate property to George Beston, Esq. for a term of twenty-one
years; and two years afterwards, without any notice being taken of that
gentleman’s interest, it was appropriated to the Free Schools, in which
it is now vested.

The living, though properly a curacy, has long been styled a vicarage,
and is in the patronage of the crown.  The incumbent is always the
mayor’s chaplain.

This parish is by far the largest in the place, comprising very nearly
half the town, and a great extent of the surrounding country.

The day-spring of the Reformation early visited our town.  In 1407,
Master William Thorpe, a priest, came to Shrewsbury, and mounted the
pulpit in St. Chad’s church, from whence he boldly condemned the
favourite tenets of popery.  Thorpe was in consequence thrown into
prison, subsequently conveyed to Lambeth, and after a confinement of
several months convened before the Archbishop of Canterbury at Saltwood,
on a complaint exhibited against him by “the bailives and worshipful
cominalte” of this town.  In his examination he candidly admitted the
charges laid against him, but adhered to his opinions with manly and
unshrinking steadiness.  Of the result of the trial and his subsequent
history we possess no account.

In the year 1394, this church, which had at that time a wooden steeple
covered with lead, was consumed by accidental fire, which extended its
ravages to a great portion of the town, then chiefly consisting of timber
houses with thatched roofs.  The damage sustained was so considerable,
that Richard II. remitted the payment of the fee farm of the town for
three years towards the repairs.

In 1490, Henry VII., accompanied by his queen and son, Prince Arthur,
kept the feast of St. George, (April 23,) in this church.  In 1581, Sir
Henry Sidney, President of the Council of the Marches, as a Knight of the
Garter, kept the feast of St. George, (April 23,) in this town, with
great splendour.  He marched in solemn procession from the Council House
to St. Chad’s Church, the choir of which was fitted up in imitation of
St. George’s Chapel, Windsor, and the stalls decorated with the arms of
the Knights of the Garter.  Sir Henry sat in his proper stall, near that
reserved for the Queen; in passing which he bowed with the same respect
as if her Majesty had actually been present.  On the conclusion of divine
service Sir Henry devoted the afternoon to feasting the burgesses.



THE COLLEGE OF ST. CHAD


adjoined the south-western extremity of the church.  Its buildings, now
converted into three handsome houses, are so entirely modernized, that
scarce a vestige is visible, except a portion of the wall adjacent to the
church-yard.  The outer walls of its precinct may be traced to a
considerable distance in the neighbouring gardens.

North of the church-yard, in a close passage called “the Sextry,” are
some old timber buildings, once communicating with the church by a
covered passage over the street.  These were, as is supposed, the
dwellings of the Vicars Choral.  In this old tenement the attendants of
Henry VII. were lodged during his visit to the town in 1496, when the
Bailiffs entertained him in almost sumptuous and royal manner.  These
premises were subsequently used as



THE MERCERS’ HALL,


though the Company have long since ceased to hold their meetings here.
The Company of Mercers, on their union with the Ironmongers and
Goldsmiths, received on May 11, 1480, a confirmation of their
composition, from Edward V. then Prince of Wales, and resident in
Shrewsbury.  This fraternity were patrons of the Altar of St. Michael in
St. Chad’s Church.

On the south side of the church-yard are



ST. CHAD’S ALMSHOUSES,


wretched hovels, projecting considerably into the adjoining street of
Belmont.  They were founded in 1409, by Bennet Tipton, a public brewer,
then residing at the College, who, so far as can be ascertained, did not
make any provision for the support of the almspeople.  An annual
rent-charge of £8, charged upon the Lythwood estate by the family of
Ireland, and a payment of 2s. 2d. from the Mercers’ Company, constitutes
the whole endowment, which is distributed in allowances of 14s. 7½d. per
annum to each of the inmates.  These tottering habitations, from the want
of a fund for judicious repairs, are capable of affording little comfort
or accommodation to the infirm tenants, who are nominated by the
proprietors of the Lythwood estate.

Opposite to the almshouses are



THE JUDGES’ LODGINGS,


a handsome house, purchased by the county in 1821, and appropriated to
the accommodation of the judges and their retinue during their attendance
at the Assizes.

Passing down College Hill, we have on our right the south elevation of
the Public Rooms.  In this spot previously stood the remains of



VAUGHAN’S PLACE,


an ancient stone mansion, erected in the early part of the 14th century,
by Sir Hamo Vaughan, knight, of West Tilbury, in Essex, or by his father,
Sir Thomas Vaughan, knight, of Stepney, members of an old Welsh family,
probably of the illustrious lineage of Owen Gwyned.  By marriage with
Eleanor, daughter and heiress of Sir Hamo, Reginald de Mutton, member of
a family conspicuous among our early Bailiffs, acquired this property,
which thenceforth became, for many generations, the town mansion of the
Myttons, and by whose descendant, the late John Mytton, Esq. of Halston,
it has been sold.  The spacious hall and adjacent apartments now contain



THE MUSEUM


of the Shropshire and North Wales Natural History and Antiquarian
Society.

This Society was established on the 26th June, 1835, and has for its
object the formation of a Museum and Scientific Library of Natural
History, Antiquities, &c. and the collection from every quarter, of
accurate information respecting the Natural and General History of the
important District of Shropshire and North Wales—its topography,
statistics, climate, and meteorological phenomena—its geological
structure, mineral, and organic fossils—its mines and collieries—its
various animal and vegetable productions.

In order to place the Institution on the most liberal basis, and to
render it of the greatest possible public advantage, the property of the
Society is vested in the Lords Lieutenant, (for the time being,) of the
county of Salop, and of the several counties of North Wales, as Trustees
for the permanent use and benefit of the district at large; by which
arrangement the perpetuity of the Institution is secured, and the
possible dispersion of the Museum, at any future period, effectually
guarded against.

The affairs of the Society are under the management of a Council,
consisting of a President, and other Officers, elected annually, and
twelve Members, of whom six retire by rotation.

All persons proposed to the Council by two Subscribers, and contributing
One Guinea annually, are Members of the Society, and have the privilege
of admission for themselves and families to the Museum and library, and
of introducing Visitors.

To diffuse a taste for Science, periodical meetings of the Society are
held, at which scientific communications are read, and popular lectures
on the various branches of Natural History delivered.

In addition to the more local objects of the Society, the Museum is open
to the reception of any specimens from distant localities, with which the
friends of science in various quarters may be induced to enrich it, and
which may serve to complete the series, and enhance the scientific value
of those indigenous to the district.  For this purpose the Council have
authority to effect exchanges of the natural products of Shropshire and
North Wales, for specimens furnished by the Cabinets of Societies, or
Individual Collectors in other parts of the world.

A General Meeting of the Society is held in August, in each year, at
which the officers are elected, the Annual Report of the progress of the
Society is read, and an appropriate Address delivered by the President.

The Museum and library are open every day, (Sunday excepted); during the
summer months, from ten o’clock in the morning until six o’clock in the
evening; but in the winter are closed at four o’clock in the evening.

In the same building is



THE GOVERNMENT SCHOOL OF ART AND DESIGN,


for the purpose of “establishing classes for acquiring elementary
instruction in Art, in connexion with existing Public Schools and
Institutions, with a view of diffusing a knowledge of Art among all
classes of the public, whether artisans, manufacturers, or consumers, and
for preparing students for entering the Schools of Art heretofore known
as Schools of Design.”

On some part of this property it is supposed the chapel, dedicated to St.
Blase, formerly stood.

Turning to the left we proceed down Swan Hill, near the bottom of which,
on the right-hand side is



THE INDEPENDENT MEETING-HOUSE,


a brick building, of an oblong form, erected in 1767.

Immediately adjoining is



ALLATT’S CHARITY SCHOOL,


erected in 1800, pursuant to the will of Mr. John Allatt, thirty-eight
years chamberlain of the Corporation, who died 2nd November, 1796, and
bequeathed his property for the education and clothing of the children of
the more respectable classes of poor persons resident in the town, and
for providing coats and gowns for a considerable number of indigent men
and women.  The structure is of freestone, plain but elegant, and
comprises commodious houses for the schoolmaster and mistress, connected
by arcades with spacious school-rooms.

The interest of the money unexpended in the building of the schools is
applied to the maintenance of a master and mistress, who instruct twenty
boys, and the same number of girls, in reading, writing, arithmetic, and
the girls in sewing.  They are clothed once a year, and at a proper age
apprenticed.  Twenty coats and eighty stuff gowns are also annually
distributed to the poor.

Proceeding on the left along Murivance, we soon arrive at



EBENEZER MEETING-HOUSE,


erected in 1834, by a congregation of seceders from the Wesleyan
Methodists.

Contiguous to this is the only remaining



TOWER ON THE TOWN WALLS,


It is square, embattled, of two stories, lighted by narrow loops, the
entrance to the upper being from the top of the wall, through a small
plain pointed arch of the age of Henry IV.  A similar arch forms the
doorway of the lower story.

                    [Picture: Tower on the Town Walls]

The more accessible parts of the Town Walls, particularly on the south
and south-western sides, were formerly strengthened by similar towers,
all of which are now demolished.

At a short distance further on, a considerable portion of



THE TOWN WALLS,


now reduced in height and stripped of its battlements, forms an useful
and agreeable public walk.  This and the Walls on the north side of the
town, called Roushill Walls, extending from the Castle Gates to the Welsh
Bridge, are all the existing remains of our ancient fortifications,
which, when entire, could not have been much less than a mile and half in
compass.

At the end of the walls, on the left, is



THE ROMAN CATHOLIC MEETING-HOUSE,


a neat building, erected in 1776, and enlarged in 1825.  The interior is
fitted up with much taste and elegance.  The altar rests on a
sarcophagus, on the front of which is a painting of the Last Supper,
after Leonardi da Vinci.  Above is a figure of Christ on the Cross, with
the inscription “Thus God loved the world.”  The roof is coved and rests
on a broad cornice, consisting of angelic figures in relief united by
wreaths and garlands of flowers.  In the gallery is a small organ, and on
each side the entrance an elegant white marble shell for the holy water.



BOWDLER’S CHARITY SCHOOL


next demands our attention; a plain brick building, founded in 1724,
pursuant to the will of Mr. Thomas Bowdler, alderman and draper, for the
instruction, clothing, and apprenticing poor children of St. Julian’s
parish.  The dress of the children is blue, whence the school is
sometimes called “The Blue School.”

Passing at the bottom of the Wyle a curiously carved timber house,
formerly the mansion of the highly respectable family of Sherar, we cross
“swift Severn’s flood” by



THE ENGLISH, OR STONE BRIDGE.


This elegant structure was completed in 1774, after a design of Mr.
Gwynn, a native of the town, at an expense of £15,710, of which £11,494
was raised by voluntary subscriptions.  It is of freestone, 400 feet in
length, and comprises seven semicircular arches, the central one being
sixty feet in width, and forty in height, and is crowned with a fine
balustrade.  The fronts are embellished with light and graceful
ornaments.  The ascent, owing to the height of the central arch, is
disagreeably steep, and the breadth of the thoroughfare, (only
twenty-five feet,) highly inconvenient to the innumerable carriages and
passengers which are continually passing over it.

                        [Picture: English Bridge]

The Old English Bridge, built probably by the Abbots and Burgesses
conjointly, was taken down on the completion of the present one.  It was
constructed on seventeen arches, and extended over the main stream, and
also an arm of the river now filled up, which crossing the road, flowed
past the monks’ infirmary into the Meole Brook.  The principal course of
the river was extended by six large arches.  Within two arches of the
eastern extremity, was a gate and strong embattled tower, with chamber
and portcullis, and beyond a drawbridge.  The thoroughfare was of the
extremely narrow width of twelve feet, and was greatly encumbered with
houses built on the northern parapet.

We now enter the little hamlet of



MERIVALE,


where, on the left, are still seen several specimens of the timber
architecture of our forefathers, and on the right stands



THE PUBLIC SUBSCRIPTION CHARITY SCHOOL,


called also the “Brown School,” from the brown dress of the children,
erected in 1778.  Children from all quarters of the town are admissible
on the recommendation of subscribers, and an useful religious education
is afforded to them on the Madras system.

The Shrewsbury and Hereford Railway here crosses the street by an



IRON BRIDGE,


with pierced balustrades, springing from stone abutments.

Our attention is next attracted by the venerable remains of



THE ABBEY OF ST. PETER AND ST. PAUL.


which owes its foundation to Roger de Montgomery, the first Norman Earl
of Shrewsbury, and arose on the site of a small wooden church dedicated
to St. Peter, built in the reign of Edward the Confessor, by Siward, a
Saxon gentleman, then resident in Shropshire.  The earl peopled his abbey
with monks of the Benedictine rule, whom he invited over from a religious
house founded on the estates of Mabel, his first Countess, at Seez, in
Normandy.  During his last illness the warlike founder entered himself a
monk of his own foundation, and received the tonsure on the 14th July,
1094.  He had previously obtained from the Abbey of Clugni, in Burgundy,
the kirtle of St. Hugh, which holy vestment he occasionally wore,
doubtless in anxious hope of its communicating some portion of the
sanctity of its former possessor.  Three days after his assumption of the
monastic garb he breathed his last, and was honourably interred in the
Lady Chapel, between the two altars.  His son Hugh, the second earl, who
was slain by Magnus, King of Norway, near Castell Aber Lleiniog, in
Anglesea, in the year 1098, also received interment in the cloisters.

On the confiscation of the Earldom of Shrewsbury, in the reign of Henry
I., our Shrewsbury Abbots, became tenants in capite, and were thenceforth
under the necessity, (as it was deemed in those days,) of attending the
King in his Parliaments, as Barons or Peers of Parliament, which honour
was continued to them by Edward III., who limited the number of mitred or
Parliamentary Abbots to twenty-eight, and enjoyed by them down to the
Dissolution.

In 1137, during the Abbacy of Herbert the third Abbot, the monastery was
enriched through the exertions of the prior, Robert Pennant, by the
acquisition of the bones of the martyred Virgin St. Wenefrede, which were
translated from their burial place at Gwytherin, in Denbighshire, and
placed with becoming solemnity in a costly shrine, prepared for their
reception in the Abbey church.  To this shrine, countless numbers of
pilgrims and diseased persons continually resorted to pay their
devotions, and to experience cures, which, according to assertion, must
have been little less than miraculous; and the wealthy vied with each
other in the costliness of their offerings.  In addition to these
treasured bones, the Monks appear to have possessed, in the reign of
Henry II., a most extensive and varied assortment of other reliques,
doubtless of equal value and efficacy.  In 1486, the Abbot Thomas Mynde,
incorporated the devotees, both male and female, of St. Wenefrede, into a
religious Guild or fraternity founded by him in her honour.  A great bell
was also dedicated to her memory.

During the various visits with which the English Sovereigns from time to
time honoured our town, it is highly probable that they took up their
residence in the Abbey, and there can be little doubt that the Parliament
of Edward I., 1283, {126} and that of Richard II., 1398, called the Great
Parliament, were held within the spacious apartments of the monastery.

The original endowment was very slender, but within a century and half
after the foundation the abbatial property comprised seventy-one manors
or large tracts of land, twenty-four churches, and the tithes of
thirty-seven parishes or vills, besides very extensive and valuable
privileges and immunities of various kinds.  In 26 Henry VIII. their
possessions were found to be of the yearly value of £572. 15s. 5¾d. equal
to upwards of £4700 in the present day.  The monastery was dissolved on
24th January, 1539–40, and pensions assigned to the Abbot, Thomas
Boteler, and the seventeen monks.

On the dissolution the burgesses presented a petition to the crown that
the Abbey might be converted into a college or free school, which request
Henry refused to accede to, alleging as a reason his intention of
erecting Shrewsbury into one of his proposed thirteen new bishoprics.
The diocese was to have comprehended the counties of Salop and Stafford,
and the endowment to have consisted of the monastic revenues.  We learn
from undoubted authority that John Boucher, Abbot of Leicester, was
actually nominated Bishop of Shrewsbury; {127} and hence doubtless arose
the appellation of “Proud Salopians,” founded on the tradition that our
townsmen rejected the offer of having their borough converted into a
city, preferring to inhabit the First of Towns.

On the 22nd July 1546, Henry VIII. granted the site of the dissolved
Abbey to Edward Watson and Henry Herdson, who, the next day, conveyed the
same to William Langley of Salop, tailor, in whose family it continued
for five generations until 1701, when Jonathan Langley, Esq. devised it
to his friend Edward Baldwyn, Esq., who by will dated in 1726, devised it
to his sister Bridget, the wife of Thomas Powys, Esq. for life, with
remainder successively in tail male to her sons Henry, Edward, and John
Powys.  In 1810 the premises were sold by the Trustees of the will of
Thomas, Jelf Powys, Esq. eldest son of the above named Edward Powys, to
Mr. Simon Hiles, in whose devisees they are now vested.

The living is a vicarage, and prior to the dissolution was in the
presentation of the monastery, but after that event it remained in the
crown, until 1797, when it was transferred to the Right Honourable Lord
Berwick, in exchange for certain advowsons in Suffolk.

From time immemorial certain lands in the Parish were given to and vested
in the Churchwardens and their successors “for the maintenance and
repairing of the Churches of the Holy Cross and St. Giles, and of either
of them.”  Consequently there has never been any need of a Church-rate.
The lands, &c. are chiefly let out upon long building leases, and the
present annual income is about £150, which upon the falling in of the
several leases will of course be greatly increased.  The Vicar and
Churchwardens are a Corporation, with the power of making leases, &c. of
the landed possessions of the said Churches, and have a common seal which
is appended to such documents.  The seal is kept in a chest secured by
three locks, and the keys are severally in the possession of the Vicar
and the two Churchwardens.  It is of brass, of the _vesica piscis_ form,
and has in the centre a baton or mace, and on either side a clothed arm
projecting towards the centre, that on the dexter side holding a pastoral
crook, that on the sinister side, a naked sword: the ground-work studded
with stars, and around the margin this inscription, * S COMMVNE DE
FFORYATE MONACHOR’.  This seal was, according to an entry in the Parish
Book, “viewed and confirmed” by the Heralds, 16 Sept. 1623, for which
10s. was paid.

The site of the Abbey comprises ten acres.  An embattled wall surrounded
probably the whole.  Of the once stately monastic buildings the remains
are inconsiderable, and consist of the Church, the Infirmary, the
Dormitory, the Reader’s Pulpit of the Refectory, the Guesten Chamber, and
the Cloister of the Abbot’s Lodging.

The space of ground on the east of the present church, containing 7300
square yards, known lately by the name of “The Abbey Garden,” whereon
formerly stood the Choir and Lady Chapel of the monastery, was in 1840
consecrated as a public Cemetery.

The present parochial church of THE HOLY CROSS embraces within its walls
the nave, side aisles, north porch, and western tower of the Abbey
church.  It is principally constructed of red stone, and though bearing
deep marks of mutilation, is still venerable and spacious, and exhibits
many curious and interesting features of ancient architecture.  The
principal entrance is at the west end under the tower, through a pointed
doorway, richly laced with mouldings, skilfully inserted within a deeply
recessed semicircular arch, the exterior rib of which springs on each
side from a Norman pillar with indented capital.  Immediately above rises
a magnificent and elegantly proportioned window, its sides and arch
enriched with delicate mouldings; in the deep hollow soffits of which is
a series of pannels, having foliated arch heads.  The outer mouldings of
the arch rise high above it, forming a spring canopy, enriched with
crockets, and ending in a flower; from which again springs very elegantly
a niche or tabernacle, with a high straight-sided canopy, flanked with a
small pinnacle at each impost, containing a figure of Edward III. in
complete armour.  The body of the window to the spring of the arch
contains two stories, divided horizontally by embattled transoms, and
perpendicularly by six upright mullions into seven compartments.  The two
central mullions, as they approach the spring of the arch, bisect the
head into smaller arches on each side, and these are further subdivided
into others, which are uncommonly acute, the interstices of all filled
with several tiers of small open pannelled tracery, mingled with
trefoiled and quatrefoiled foliage, in beautiful and varied profusion.
To the angles of the tower are attached square shallow piers, ending in
pointed canopies, and midway of each is a niche, containing statues of
St. Peter and St. Paul.  Two small double windows light each side of the
upper story of the tower, the summit of which is terminated by an
unsightly battlement of brick.

           [Picture: Abbey Church, or Church of the Holy Cross]

The eastern portion of the nave is separated on either side from the
side-aisles by three semicircular arches, resting on short massive round
pillars, with shallow bases and filletted capitals, in the plainest and
earliest Anglo-Norman style.  Above, the remains of the triforium of the
ancient church may be distinctly traced.  The western portion has, on
each side, two pointed arches in the pure Gothic of the 14th century,
delicately lined with mouldings, and rising from well-proportioned
clustered pillars, with capitals composed of a series of small horizontal
mouldings.  A clere-story, pierced with handsome Gothic windows, crowns
this part of the edifice; and similar windows are continued along the
north and south sides of the tower.

A lofty and graceful pointed arch, springing from high clustered imposts,
opens from the nave to the tower, and affords a view of the fine west
window; the upper portion of which is filled with the armorial bearings
of Richard II.; his uncles, the Dukes of Gloucester, Lancaster, and York;
and the alliances of the noble families of Fitzalan and Stafford, Earls
of Arundel and Stafford, and the lower part with those of the late
Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Howley, William Lord Berwick, patron, the
Rev. R. Lingen Burton, vicar, Dr. Butler, Bishop of Lichfield, Archdeacon
Bather, and Rev. Richard Scott, (the donor).  The whole area of the tower
is occupied by a capacious gallery, erected in 1817, for the
accommodation of the children of the National School, in which stands a
fine-toned organ, made by Gray of London, and purchased by subscription.

The eastern extremity of the nave is terminated by a wall, built between
the two great western piers which once supported the central tower, in
which is inserted a fine triple Norman window, {133} elaborately adorned
with mouldings, containing figures of David, Solomon, St. John, St.
James, St. Peter, and St. Paul, executed by Mr. David Evans with his
usual taste.  Underneath this window is a stone altar screen, composed of
an arcade of five Norman arches, with rich and varied mouldings,
surmounted by a pierced balustrade.  The central arch contains a painting
of the Angels appearing to the Women at the Sepulchre, by Mr. John
Bridges, of London.  The holy table is fenced by a STONE RAILING, uniform
in style.  The whole of the stone work of the eastern portion, together
with the windows on the south aide of the church, were designed and
executed by Messrs. Carline and Dodson of this town, through the pious
liberality of the late Rev. R. Scott, B.D.

                   [Picture: Abbey Church, eastern end]

The western ends of the side aisles are separated from the church, and
used as a vestry and schoolroom.  At their eastern extremities are the
arches which communicated with the transept, now blocked up and pierced
with square-headed windows, in which are some ancient shields of arms, in
stained glass, preserved from the monastic buildings.  The north-east
window of the north aisle contains a large figure of St. Peter, the arms
of the See of Lichfield, of Lord Berwick the donor, and of thirteen
incumbents since the Reformation.  The opposite window of the south aisle
is of a rich mosaic design, enclosing shields of the marriages of the
family of Rocke.

                  [Picture: Stone Railing, Abbey Church]

The remnant of the screen of a chauntry chapel, in the north aisle,
decorated with a series of small foliated niches, each divided by a
buttress and finial, and containing traces of sculptured imagery, appears
to indicate the situation of the chauntry of the guild of St. Wenefrede.

The ancient and curious font originally belonged to the church of High
Ercall, in this county.  In the pavement, near the vestry-door, are many
interesting specimens of emblazoned tiles; and a font, the basin of
which, representing an open flower, wound with drapery festooned from the
mouths of grotesque heads, was found among the ruins of the Abbey, and is
fixed on a pedestal formed of the upper part of the ancient cross, called
the “Weeping Cross,” and sculptured with the Visitation, the Virgin and
Child, the Crucifixion, and a figure in the attitude of devotion.

Communicating with the north aisle by a fine semicircular arch,
overspread with massy round mouldings, rising from clustered piers, is
the spacious vaulted north porch.  The exterior portal is formed by a
deeply recessed square opening, the mouldings of which fall over the
angles far down the sides, ending in mutilated busts.  Within this is a
graceful pointed arch, rising from a round column on each side.  Above
are two chamber stories, each lighted by a small window.  On the right
and left, a tabernacled niche, extends the whole height of the upper
stories.  An ill-designed stone parapet crowns the gable.

And now

                “let’s talk of graves, of tombs and epitaphs;”

of which many ancient ones, either found among the ruins, or removed
hither on the demolition of other sacred edifices in the town and county,
are preserved in the ample side-aisles; the more remarkable of which, we
shall briefly enumerate in the order of their supposed dates:—

[Picture: Monument to Roger de Montgomery, Abbey Church] Under an arch in
the south aisle, a mutilated figure of a warrior in the costume of the
reign of King John, found among the ruins, and said to represent the
founder, Earl ROGER DE MONTGOMERY.

In the north aisle, a cumbent figure, brought from St. Chad’s, of a
person in the robes and coif of a judge.

In the south aisle, a monument brought from St. Giles’ church, of the
shape en _dos d’ane_, and probably of the early part of the thirteenth
century.  The sculpture consists of a rich foliated cross, in high
relief: under which is a figure in priestly vestments with uplifted
hands, also in relief, and the insignia of the priestly office, the
chalice, bell, book, and candle, in outline.  Round the edge of the stone
are the letters, T : M : O : R : E : U : A.

Opposite to the last, a cumbent effigy of a cross-legged knight, in
linked armour and surcoat, removed from the priory church of Wombridge,
in this county, and conjectured, from the tradition of that
neighbourhood, to commemorate Sir Walter de Dunstanville, the third lord
of Ideshale, a great benefactor of that priory, who died 25th Henry III.,
1240.

In the north porch, two very singular figures, which originally lay on a
large double altar-tomb in the style of the fifteenth century, in old St.
Alkmund’s church.  One represents a knight in plate-armour of the
fifteenth century, partly covered with the monastic dress, and the other
a person in the dress of a hermit of the Romish church.

Near the founder’s tomb in the south aisle, an alabaster altar-tomb,
bearing recumbent figures of a man, “plated in habiliments of war,” and
his wife, originally erected in Wellington church, in this county, to
William Charlton, Esq. of Apley Castle, who died the 1st July, 1544, and
Anne his wife, who died the 7th June, 1524.

       [Picture: Altar-tomb of Richard Onslow, Esq., Abbey Church]

At the eastern extremity of the north aisle, a large altar-tomb with
cumbent effigies, to the memory of RICHARD ONSLOW, Esq.  Speaker of the
House of Commons in the 8th Elizabeth, who died 1571, and his lady
Katherine Harding; formerly in the Bishop’s Chancel of Old St. Chad’s
Church.

In a corresponding situation in the south aisle, an altar-tomb of
alabaster, in the Grecian style of the age of James I., bearing two
cumbent figures; an alderman in his civic “robe and furr’d gown,” and a
lady in the scarlet gown formerly worn by the lady-mayoresses of our
town, commemorating WM. JONES, Esq. who died the 15th July, 1612, and
Eleanor his wife, who died 26th February, 1623; the grand-father and
grand-mother of Chief Justice Jones.  This was removed from St.
Alkmund’s.

           [Picture: Altar-tomb to Alderman Jones and his wife]

Above Speaker Onslow’s monument, a mural monument, from St. Chad’s, in
the Grecian taste of the seventeenth century, representing a gentleman in
a ruff and long gown, and a lady with a long veil thrown back, kneeling
under two escallopped arches: above, a lady in a richly laced habit and
coif, and a little girl kneeling;—inscribed to the memory of Thomas
Edwardes, Esq., who died 19th March, 1634, and of Mary, the wife of his
son, Thomas Edwardes, Esq., died July 18th, 1641.

Above Jones’s monument, a mural monument, from St. Alkmund’s, with the
figure of an alderman as low as the waist, with falling band,
representing John Lloyd, Esq., Alderman of Shrewsbury, who died 16th
June, 1647.

Near the vestry is a mural monument to the Rev. R. Scott, with the
following inscription:—

                          AS A MARK OF GRATITUDE TO
                       THE REVEREND RICHARD SCOTT, B.D.
                      WHOSE OWN WORKS ARE BETTER PRAISE
                          THAN THE WORDS OF OTHERS,
               THIS MEMORIAL IS PLACED HERE BY THE PARISHIONERS
                       OF THE HOLY CROSS AND ST. GILES.
             HE REBUILT THE EASTERN WINDOW OF THIS CHURCH, ADDING
                      A PART OF THE STAINED GLASS TO IT.
             HE GAVE THE ALTAR SCREEN AND STONE RAIL, THE SERVICE
                 OF COMMUNION PLATE, WITH THE BOOKS, AND ALL
                        OTHER FURNITURE OF THE ALTAR.
             HE REPEWED BOTH THE AISLES, THE NORTHERN BEING GIVEN
                           FOR THE USE OF THE POOR.
             HE BUILT THE SIX WINDOWS IN THE SOUTH AISLE, AND THE
                TWO SMALLER WINDOWS AT THE WESTERN END OF THE
                     CHURCH, ADDING STAINED GLASS TO THE
                            GREAT WESTERN WINDOW.
             HE GAVE NEW FIGURES OF ST. PETER AND ST. PAUL TO BE
                 PLACED WHERE THE OLD HAD BEEN AT THE WESTERN
                             FRONT OF THE TOWER.
                HE RESTORED THE ARCH OF THE WESTERN ENTRANCE.
             HE ALSO GAVE MANY OTHER LESSER GIFTS TO THIS CHURCH.
               HE RESTORED ST. GILES’S CHURCH, MAKING IT AGAIN
                      AVAILABLE FOR THE SERVICE OF GOD.
           HE GAVE TO THE SAME CHURCH, PARTLY IN HIS LIFE TIME AND
              PARTLY BY BEQUEST, THE SUM OF ONE THOUSAND POUNDS
                 VESTED IN THE PUBLIC FUNDS, AS AN ENDOWMENT
                       TOWARDS THE SUPPORT OF A CURATE.
                     HE DIED ON THE 6TH OF OCTOBER, 1848.
               BLESSED ARE THE DEAD WHICH DIE IN THE LORD FROM
          HENCEFORTH; YEA, SAITH THE SPIRIT, THAT THEY MAY REST FROM
                THEIR LABOURS AND THEIR WORKS DO FOLLOW THEM.

                                                       REVELATION XIV. 13.

Numerous other mural monuments and inscriptions of more modern dates,
many of which are chaste and elegant, record deceased members of the
principal families of the parish.

Southwestward of the church, on the margin of the Meole Brook, stands,



THE MONK’S INFIRMARY,


where “crepytude and age a laste asylume founde.”  The building is of red
stone, in length about 130 feet, and originally consisted of two oblong
wings, with high gable ends, pierced with round arched windows, connected
by an embattled building resting on rude Norman arches, and lighted by
three square headed windows between strong shelving buttresses.  One of
these wings next the street was in 1836 taken down, and modern houses
erected on its site.

On the south side of the church are the remains of a long building, now
converted into stables, formerly the DORMITORY, OR DORTER.

Of the spacious Refectory no portion exists, with the exception of



THE READER’S PULPIT,


                 [Picture: Reader’s Pulpit, Abbey Church]

the admiration of every antiquary and person of taste.  Its plan is
octagonal; some broken steps lead to the interior through a narrow
flat-arched door, on the eastern side.  The southern half rests on the
ruined walls, and originally looked into one of the outer courts.  Its
arches are open, unadorned with sculptured pannels, and bear marks of
having been glazed.  The corresponding moiety, which projected
considerably within the hall, rests on a bracket enriched with delicate
mouldings, which springs from a corbel.  The western side is a blank
wall.  Six narrow pointed arches with trefoil heads support the conical
stone roof, which is internally vaulted on eight delicate ribs, springing
out of the wall, and adorned at their intersection in the centre, by a
very fine boss, representing an open flower, on which is displayed a
delicate sculpture of the Crucifixion, with St. John and the Virgin Mary
at the foot of the cross.  The three northern arches, which were within
the hall, are filled up, to the height of two feet from the floor, with
stone embattled pannels, sculptured into crocketed tabernacles, with
intervening buttresses terminating in pinnacles.  On the central pannel
is the Annunciation; the right-hand one bears figures of St. Peter and
St. Paul; and that on the left, St. Wenefrede and the Abbot Beuno.  The
architecture of this elegant structure is referred to the fifteenth
century.  Much conjecture has arisen amongst the most eminent antiquaries
respecting its probable use, but there can be little doubt, that it
originally projected from the wall within the Refectory, and was used as
a pulpit, from whence one of the junior brethren of the monastery, in
compliance with the rule of the Benedictine order, daily, read, during
meal times, some book of divinity to the Monks, seated at the tables
below in the hall.

Southward of the pulpit is a large range of red stone building, now
incorporated with the Abbey House, ending on the west with a high gable
terminated by a flower, supposed to have been the GUESTEN HALL.

To the south-east of this is the ABBOT’S LODGING; of which the only
remnant is a portion of the cloister, consisting of three pointed arches,
on the piers of which, are indications of the corbels and springers of an
elegant groined roof.  A similar fragment adjoins this at right angles.

North of the Abbey Church is the beautiful



HOSPITAL OF THE HOLY CROSS,


erected and endowed in 1852, by Daniel Rowland, Esq., in memory of his
brother, the late Rev. W. G. Rowland, M.A., a native of Shrewsbury, who
resided during a long life, in a house on the spot, and who for 32 years
officiated as Curate of the Abbey Church, until his subsequent
appointment to the living of St. Mary, which he held until his death,
November 28th, 1851.  The edifice comprises five houses, and was designed
and executed by Mr. S. P. Smith.  The appointment is vested in the
Ministers of the Abbey and St. Mary, and the Head Master of the Free
School, as Trustees.  The Hospitallers must be widows, those residing in
the Abbey and St. Mary’s parishes having a preference, and receive from
the endowment an annual sum of £10. 8s. 0d.

A raised walk, formerly overshadowed by a venerable avenue of umbrageous
horse-chesnut trees, but now flanked with modern houses, and called
“Whitehall Place,” and “Tankerville Place,” conducts us to THE WHITE
HALL.

This stately mansion acquired this appellation from the conspicuous
appearance which its white-washed walls present from many points of the
adjacent neighbourhood.  It is, constructed of freestone; in plan is
square and lofty, the summits of the walls broken into numerous pointed
gables, and the roof adorned with highly ornamented chimneys, and crowned
with a central octagonal turret.  The gatehouse still remains, and opens
through its arched portal to a small court in front of the house.  The
interior is spacious, and adapted by subsequent alterations to the modern
notions of comfort and convenience.  The walls of the extensive gardens
are clothed with many curious and choice fruit trees; and at the back of
the house is a fine Walnut-tree, magnificent in umbrageous expanse,
apparently coeval with the mansion.  This fine and perfect specimen of
the domestic architecture of the reign of Queen Elizabeth was built in
1578, by Richard Prince, Esq. a native of Shrewsbury, who, by skill and
integrity in the honourable and lucrative profession of the law, raised
himself and his family to distinguished eminence.

                          [Picture: White Hall]

In the adjacent fields is



THE RACE COURSE,


formed in 1833.

Constituting part of the race-ground is a field bearing the name of “The
Soldiers’ Piece,” which “old folks, time’s doting chronicles,” point out
as the spot on which the unfortunate Charles I., when at Shrewsbury in
1642, drew up his army and addressed the assembled gentry of the county
on the subject of his distresses.

A short walk now brings us to THE COLUMN, erected by the voluntary
subscriptions of the grateful inhabitants of the town and county of
Salop, to commemorate the brilliant victories and achievements of that
distinguished warrior, their countryman, Lieutenant General Lord Hill.
This fine Doric pillar, considered to be the largest in the world, was
completed on 18th June, 1816, the anniversary of the glorious Battle of
Waterloo, at an expense of £5,973.  The design was furnished by Mr.
Edward Haycock, and the masonry executed by Mr. John Straphen, both of
Shrewsbury.  The height, including the statue, is 132 feet, and the
weight 1120 tons.  The chastely fluted shaft ascends from a square
pedestal, raised on two steps, and flanked by angular piers, bearing
lions couchant, and is surmounted by a cylindrical, pedestal, supporting
a statue of his Lordship.  Appropriate inscriptions are engraved on the
panels of the basal pedestal.  A beautiful spiral staircase of stone, the
munificent donation of the spirited builder, Mr. Straphen, winds round
the interior of the shaft, and opens on the summit, at the base of the
pedestal of the statue, from whence the delighted visitor will enjoy a
panoramic view over the fertile plain of Shropshire, unrivalled in extent
and splendour:—

    “Ten thousand landscapes open to the view,
    For ever pleasing, and for ever new.”

                 [Picture: Column in honour of Lord Hill]

Near the column, in a neat Doric stone cottage, dwells the attendant who
shows it.

At a few paces’ distance in a peaceful and retired spot stands the only
ecclesiastical structure of the town, with



ST. GILES’S CHURCH,


                      [Picture: St. Giles’s Church]

the exception of St. Mary’s church, which has descended to our times in
an entire state.  Of its foundation we possess no record, though it has
been conjectured that its erection did not long precede the year 1136,
when Robert, Prior of Shrewsbury, rested here with the bones of St.
Wenefrede, previous to their translation to her shrine in the Abbey; and
some confirmation is afforded to this conjecture by the arches of the
northern and southern doors, the oldest existing portions of the
structure, being of the architecture of that æra.  It was doubtless used
as the chapel of the hospital for lepers, which formerly stood at the
west end, but of which all traces have long been swept away.  The edifice
consists of a nave, chancel, and north aisle, with an open stone
bell-turret, pierced for two bells.  The nave is entered by plain
semicircular doorways on the north and south sides, and is divided from
the side-aisle by three pointed arches on plain round pillars; attached
to the north sides of which are massive square piers, having fillets
above and on a level with the capitals, singularly adorned with sunk
quatrefoils.  A handsome pointed arch of the fourteenth century
communicates with the chancel, in the flat-arched eastern window of which
are spirited figures of the Evangelists under rich canopies, with their
characteristic emblems above, and representations of the Visitation, the
Wise Men’s Offering, and the Presentation, all most exquisitely executed
in stained glass by Mr. David Evans.  The small lancet window on the
north side also contains a figure of the patron saint, St. Giles, in
ancient stained glass.

In the floor are several ancient stones bearing crosses, probably
memorials of the masters of the hospital.  At the east end of the north
aisle is a font originally in the Abbey Church, formed of a Norman
capital.

According to entries in the Parish Books of the date 1665, this church
originally possessed a “steeple” at the western end, probably an open
stone bell-turret, somewhat similar to the present one, springing from
corbels, which were visible in the western wall previous to its being
rebuilt in 1852, and a porch before the south door.  In the “steeple” was
a “great bell” and two smaller ones, which were taken down in 1672, and
used in the following year, with four lesser bells and the great
“Wenefrede” Bell, in the recasting of the present ring of eight of the
Abbey Church.

In 1740, a considerable sum raised by subscription was expended in a
thorough repair of St. Giles’s Church, when probably the “steeple” and
the porch were removed, a bell-turret and single bell erected, and the
whole brought into the state in which it continued down to the recent
restoration.

In 1827 this curious edifice was, through the laudable exertions and
entirely at the expense of the Rev. W. G. Rowland, the liberal donor of
the beautiful east window, thoroughly and judiciously repaired, and
happily rescued from that ruin and decay to which its previous neglected
condition was fast hastening.

                [Picture: Interior of St. Giles’s Church]

The primitive rude and massive oak benches in the nave were subsequently
removed, and replaced with new ones.  A new pulpit, reading-pew, and
altar-screen, of oak, beautifully carved and in unison with the
architecture, were added, and the whole building fitted up for divine
service by the pious munificence of the late Rev. Richard Scott, B.D.
Divine Service, which had previously been celebrated only on two Sunday
evenings in the year, has, since June 1836, been regularly offered up
every Sunday.

In the church-yard is a large stone with a cavity on the upper side,
(doubtless the base and socket of the cross) termed “the PEST BASIN,”
which tradition states to have been used during the time of the plague
for holding water, in which, to avoid the spread of the disease, the
towns-people deposited their money in their bargains for provisions with
the country-folk.  A portion of the head of this cross was discovered
under the west wall of the church during the repairs in 1852.  It is now
placed in the north aisle, and displays sculptures of the Crucifixion,
St. Giles, Virgin and Child, and St. Michael.

            [Picture: “Pest-Basin,” in St. Giles’s Churchyard]

Our town has been many times visited with those severe scourges of
Heaven, the dreadful pestilential diseases of the sweating sickness and
the plague.  The former desolated the town in the reign of Edward III. in
1349, and again in that of Henry VII., in the years 1485 and 1551; and
the latter raged here with frightful fury in the years 1537, 1575, 1630,
1632, and 1634.  In the years 1832 and 1849, also, many of the
inhabitants fell victims to the cholera.

For the support of the Hospital of Lepers, Henry II. granted thirty
shillings yearly out of the rent of the County of Salop, and a handful of
two hands of every sack of corn, and a handful of one hand of every sack
of flour, exposed for sale in Shrewsbury market.  Henry III. also in 1232
gave them a horse-load of wood, daily, from his wood of Lythwood.

The appointment of the Master was vested in the Abbot and Convent of
Shrewsbury, who, a short time previous to the Dissolution, granted a long
lease of it to Richard Lee, Esq. of Langley, who assigning his interest
to the family of Prince, of the White Hall, it passed with their other
estates into the Tankerville family.  The Earl of Tankerville still
annually receives from the Sheriff the thirty shillings granted by Henry
II. and nominates the four hospitallers, who now live in the adjoining
comfortable cottages, and to each of whom his Lordship pays 1s. 6d. per
week, 3s. at Midsummer for coal, and 12s. 6d. at Christmas for a garment.
{153}

Near St. Giles’s is a handsome edifice of brick, built by government in
1806, at an expense of £10,000, after a design by Wyatt, and intended as



A DEPÔT


for containing the arms of the volunteer corps in this and the adjoining
counties.

The principal building is 135 feet by 39 feet, divided into an upper and
lower story, and is surrounded by an oblong enclosure, within which are
13 small neat houses.  Little use having for many years been made of this
structure, it has, by purchase, become the property of the present Lord
Berwick.  Recently it has been adapted as the Military Depôt of the
Shropshire Militia. {154}

We now return along the suburb of the Abbey Foregate,

    “A long great streate, well builded large and faire,
    In as good ayre, as may be wisht with wit.”

to the English Bridge.

Turning on the left we enter the suburb of Coleham, and soon arrive at



THE CHURCH OF THE HOLY TRINITY,


                        [Picture: Trinity Church]

consecrated August 25, 1837, for the accommodation of the numerous
inhabitants of Coleham, by voluntary subscriptions, aided by grants from
the Church Building Societies, at a cost of nearly £1900.  Adjoining is a
large cemetery for the whole parish of St. Julian, and also commodious
school rooms.  The church, which was made a district parish church in
1841, contains 812 sittings, of which 504 are free.  In the gallery is a
small organ, by Bishop; in the window over the altar are figures in
stained glass of the Evangelists, and St. Peter and St. Paul; and in two
of the windows in the body of the church are various scriptural
medallions in stained glass, which, together with a handsome service of
communion plate, were presented by the piety of the late Rev. Richard
Scott, B.D.

Near to Belle Vue is the Dissenters’ Cemetery. {157}

Having passed the English Bridge we turn on the left, and following the
course of “the sandy-bottom’d Severn,” soon arrive at the remains of



THE FRANCISCAN, OR GREY, FRIARS,


founded at an early period of the 13th century.  Hawise Gadarn, (born
1291,) the heiress of the ancient Princes of Powis Gwenwynwyn, and wife
of Sir John de Cherleton, was a great benefactress of this religious
house, and contributed to the friars considerable aid in the erection of
their church, which it is conjectured she adorned with the fine stained
glass now in the east window of St. Mary’s church.  This patronage was
continued to them by her son Sir John de Cherleton.  The corporation of
the town also appear at all times to have regarded these friars with an
eye of peculiar favour, and to have bestowed upon them various sums of
money towards the repairs of their buildings.  In the reign of Henry
VIII. the greater part of the house was rebuilt by Dr. Francis Duff hill,
at that time Warden.  This and the other friaries of the town were on
their dissolution granted by Henry VIII. in 1543, to Richard Andrewes,
and Nicholas Temple.  Portions of the friary converted into houses still
exist.  On the side next the river is a MULLIONED WINDOW, and on the
other side a doorway, both of the obtusely pointed arch of the reign of
Henry VIII.  The walls of the garden may be traced far into the adjoining
meadow.

                  [Picture: Window in Franciscan Friary]

The Lady Hawise, according to Leland, “lyith buried under a flate marble
by Chorleton’s tumbe,” in the church, and several members of her ancient
family received interment here.  The path on the “gentle Severn’s sedgy
bank” soon leads us to



THE QUARRY,


    “Whose walks are ever pleasant; every scene
    Is rich in beauty, lively, or serene.”

                          [Picture: The Quarry]

This fine public promenade occupies a rich sloping meadow of about twenty
acres, and derives its name from a disused stone quarry, nearly in the
centre, which supplied a considerable part of the red sandstone visible
in the older portions of the walls and churches of the town.  Its site
has long been designated “the Dingle,” and is planted with a bold clump
of most magnificent horse-chesnut and lime trees.  A noble avenue of
lofty lime trees, gracefully unite their topmost boughs into a rich
embowered arch, and with their lower branches feathering to the gentle
windings of the beauteous river, forms the principal walk; to the middle
and each end of which, three other shaded walks lead from various streets
of the town.  The still retirement and pleasing gloom of this delightful
grove, from which the noise of the busy town, and even a prospect of its
buildings, are almost entirely excluded,—the refreshing coolness of its
shade,—the rich verdure which ever clothes its meadows,—the fine sweep of
its umbrageous arch,—and the majestic flow of the river, which here

                “with gentle murmur glides,
    And makes sweet music with th’ enamel’d stones;
    Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge
    He overtaketh in his pilgrimage.”

all combine to render it the favourite and constant resort of the
inhabitant, and a principal attraction to the stranger.  The ground was
laid out and planted in 1791, during the mayoralty of Henry Jenks, Esq.,
by Mr. Wright, a celebrated and intelligent nursery-man, resident in the
adjacent village of Bicton.

On the west side of the Quarry, in the Dingle, called the Dry Dingle, are
the remains of a rude amphitheatre, with ascending seats cut in the bank,
where the Friars of the adjacent Convent performed the ancient religious
Mysteries, or Miracle-plays, so famous in the days of our ancestors.
Here, also, during the reign of Elizabeth many plays were exhibited in
which the scholars of the Free Schools sustained the principal
characters.

Close adjoining to the Quarry are



THE AUSTIN FRIARS,


of which the only remnant is the lower part of a square red stone
building, probably the refectory, with two pointed doorways, and the
bases of a range of handsome windows.  We find these friars here as early
as the year 1235, when they obtained from Henry III. a grant of a spot of
ground outside the walls, which had been used as a burial-place when the
kingdom was under an interdict, in the reign of King John.  Upon this
small space they erected their chapel and buildings, which they were
enabled to enlarge and extend in the year 1295, by the piety of Geoffrey
Randolf, a burgess of the town, who granted them a contiguous plot of
ground for that purpose.  At subsequent periods various portions of the
lands in the immediate neighbourhood of the convent were successively
added to their precinct.  The corporation also were not wanting in
frequent and liberal contributions to these, as well as to the other
friars of the town.  Still they never appear to have been either rich or
numerous, and at the Dissolution their buildings were in a most
deplorable state of ruin, inhabited only by a dissolute Prior, and two
Friars not of the foundation, who had greatly and disgracefully wasted
the conventual property.  In 1403, several persons of note, who fell at
Battlefield, are said to have found interment in the cemetery of this
convent.

                       [Picture: St. Chad’s Church]

At the top of the Quarry stands the CHURCH OF ST. CHAD, a structure,
which, notwithstanding its many and glaring defects, must still be
pronounced handsome and commodious.  The body is circular, and consists
of a rustic basement with square windows, on which reposes a
superstructure, containing a series of large arched windows; between each
of which are coupled Ionic pilasters, resting on the basement, and
supporting a bold cornice, crowned with an open balustrade.  Attached to
the body is a smaller circle, similarly decorated; at the extremity of
which is the steeple, which consists of three stories: a square rustic
basement, from which rises an octagonal belfry, enriched with Ionic
pilasters, and above, a small cupola, supported on a heavy cylinder,
surrounded by eight slender Corinthian pillars.  A heavy cross and vane
crowns the summit.  On each side of the tower is a plain square wing,
which contains a vestry-room.  Beneath a handsome portico of four Doric
pillars supporting a pediment, is the chief entrance, which opens into a
circular vestibule beneath the tower; beyond which is a kind of
ante-church, comprising the staircases leading to the galleries and
communicating with the body of the church.  The interior is not a
complete circle, a segment having been taken off for two smaller
staircases, and for the shallow oblong recess forming the chancel.  A
bold arch, resting on four rich composite pillars, marks the division of
the body and chancel.  Above the altar, (which contrary to ancient usage,
is placed on the north side,) in a broad Venetian window is a
representation, in stained glass, of the “Descent from the Cross,” after
Rubens, the Salutation, and the Presentation in the Temple, executed by
Mr. David Evans of this town, whose skill and taste have also been
exercised in four other windows of this church, of which the subjects
are, the Raising of Lazarus, Christ receiving little children, the
Healing of the Sick, and the Tribute Money, all presented by the late
Rev. R. Scott, B.D.  One of the other windows of the Church contains a
memorial in stained glass to E. Muckleston, Esq.  A deep and capacious
gallery, decorated in front with a handsome balustrade, surrounds the
whole church, except the chancel, and reposes on a double range of short
pillars, with Ionic capitals.  From these a corresponding tier of slender
fluted shafts, resembling the Corinthian order, rises to the ceiling,
which is adorned with a glory in the centre, and a rich cornice,
consisting of angels with wings interlaced.  Over the chief entrance is a
large and fine organ built by Gray of London, in 1794, and enlarged and
improved by Gray and Davidson, in 1848.  It has 30 stops, and comprises
1325 pipes.

This edifice, though possessing too much of the theatrical air, is
handsomely and conveniently furnished, and by the ingenuity of the
circular arrangement, all the congregation can distinctly hear and most
see the officiating clergyman during the whole of the services.  It will
accommodate, in the pews below, 1000 persons, and in the gallery 750,
besides 400 free sittings provided for the poor.

[Picture: Font in St. Chad’s Church] THE FONT formerly belonged to the
parish church of Malpas, Cheshire; and is that in which the late Bishop
Heber was baptized.

The principal monuments are:—an oblong Grecian tablet, with an elegant
Latin inscription to the Rev. Francis Leighton, his lady, and two
grandchildren; a handsome pannelled marble tablet, supporting a fine bust
of the deceased, by Chantrey, inscribed to Mr. John Simpson, the eminent
architect and builder; and a similar tablet and bust, by Chantrey, to
William Hazledine, Esq., the builder of the Menai Bridge; and in the
Vestibule a marble mural monument to the Officers and Privates of the
53rd or Shropshire Regiment, who were killed on 10th February 1846, in
the battles of Subraon, Aliwal, and the relief of Loodhiana on the
Sutluj.

This church also contains a monument to the Rev. R. Scott, with the
following inscription:—

                                    SACRED
                               TO THE MEMORY OF
                         THE REV. RICHARD SCOTT, B.D.
                            WHO DEPARTED THIS LIFE
                          ON THE 6TH OCTOBER, 1848,
                         IN THE 68TH YEAR OF HIS AGE.
             THIS TABLET IS ERECTED BY HIS NEPHEW WILLIAM SCOTT,
                    AS A TOKEN OF REGARD AND AFFECTION TO
                              HIS LATE RELATIVE.

In the vestry is a carved figure of ST. CHAD in his episcopal robes,
preserved from the old church.

[Picture: Figure of St. Chad in St. Chad’s Church] This church is used on
most public occasions.  The plan was furnished by Mr. Geo. Stewart, and
the cost of erection amounted to £17,752; the greater part of which sum
still remains a heavy debt on the parish.  In the tower is a peal of
twelve melodious bells, cast by Messrs. Meares of London, purchased by
subscription, and inscribed with appropriate mottos.  The deep-toned
tenor, of the weight of forty-one cwt. on which the clock strikes, may be
heard at a distance of several miles.

Turning on the left, we proceed down St. John’s Hill, and pass



THE QUAKERS’ MEETING-HOUSE,


a plain brick structure, built in 1746, and enlarged in 1807,—and



ST. JOHN’S, OR THE WESLEYAN METHODISTS’ MEETING-HOUSE,


a spacious and commodious brick building, erected in 1804, and
subsequently enlarged and decorated in a handsome style.

Besides these, there are meeting-houses for the Calvinistic Methodists,
and Sandemanians, or Scotch Baptists, in Hill’s Lane;—for the Baptists
and Independents, in Doglane and Castle Forgate; and for the Unitarians,
in High Street.

At the bottom of St. John’s Hill is



THE THEATRE,


the fine and lofty stuccoed front of which has a bold and imposing
effect, and constitutes the principal ornament of the street.  The
central part comprises a range of excellent shops; at each end of which
is a comfortable dwelling-house, with entrance doors to the Theatre.  The
interior is handsomely decorated, and adapted for the comfortable
accommodation of a numerous audience.  The scenery, properties, and other
ornaments, are entirely new, and in a superior style.

The remains of an embattled stone mansion, called Charlton Hall, the
residence of the ancient family of Charlton, Lords of Powis, previously
occupied the site of the Theatre.

Opposite to the Theatre, in Barker Street, is



THE BELL STONE,


a red stone structure, surrounding three sides of a small quadrangle,
erected in 1582, by Edward Owen, alderman and draper of Shrewsbury, but
lately modernized, and completely re-cast, and now occupied as the
banking-house of a Branch of the National Provincial Bank of England.
The mansion derives its name of the Bell or Bente Stone, from a large
block of Chert or Hornstone, which originally lay in the street, at the
north angle of the outer wall, and which is still preserved in the court,
whither it was removed during the late alterations.  The derivation of
the name and its connexion with the Stone have hitherto baffled the
ingenuity and researches of antiquaries.

Passing onwards through Shoplatch, we have on our right a mass of red
stone buildings, communicating with the street by a passage,—which
conjecture has assigned, either as the remains of the town house of the
Abbots of Haughmond, (that monastery having possessed property in this
immediate locality,) or as the residence of the ancient and extinct
family of Shutt, the name of Shutt Place being supposed to be preserved
in the name of the adjoining street, Shoplatch.

We now proceed down Mardol, about the centre of which, on the left-hand
side, is Hill’s Lane, in which stands



ROWLEY’S MANSION, OR HILL’S MANSION,


said to have been the first brick building erected in Shrewsbury.  From
dates still visible on the leaden pipes, it appears to have been built in
1618, by William Rowley, an eminent brewer.  This gentleman was a
favourer of Puritanism, and an intimate friend of Richard Baxter the
Nonconformist, and is stated to have been instrumental in strengthening
the prejudices of the latter against the church.  He amassed a large
property by fortunate speculations in Barbadoes, and is related to have
planted Rowley’s Islands in the Caribbees.  His son, Roger Rowley, Esq.
was of Gray’s Inn, and was the first person in this town who kept his
carriage.  His eldest daughter and co-heiress Priscilla married John
Hill, Esq. of Shrewsbury, who made this mansion his residence, and gave
to it, and the street in which it stands, their present names.

At the bottom of Mardol are extensive Quays and Warehouses, at which the
numerous vessels which navigate the Severn load and unload their burdens.
Here also is



THE CIRCUS,


a spacious building, used occasionally for equestrian performances, but
more constantly as a depository for the immense quantities of butter and
cheese which are brought to the town for sale at the monthly fairs.



THE WELSH BRIDGE,


                         [Picture: Welsh Bridge]

called also in old times St. George’s Bridge, from the hospital of Saint
George, which once stood adjacent to it, crosses the Severn at this
point.  It is a convenient, substantial, and handsome structure,
consisting of five elegant arches, the length being 266 feet, the breadth
thirty, and the height thirty, and was erected in 1795, after a design by
Messrs. Tilly and Carline of this town, at an expense of £8,000, raised
by subscription.

The old bridge which formerly stood here was removed on the erection of
the present one, and though highly inconvenient and ruinous, was a most
interesting monument of antiquity, and consisted of seven arches, with
massive gate towers at each extremity, in the finest style of castellated
building.  It is described in his usual quaint style by the accurate
Leland, who visited Shrewsbury in 1539, “as the greatest, fayrest, and
highest upon the stream, having 6 great arches of stone.”  “This bridge,”
he further says, “standeth on the west syde of the towne, and hath at the
one end of it a great gate to enter by into the towne; and at the other
end towardes Wales a mighty stronge towre to prohibit enemies to enter on
the bridge.”

Having passed the Welsh Bridge we enter

    “An auncient streate cal’d Franckwell many a day:
    To Ozestri, the people passe through this,
    And unto Wales, it is the reddie way.”

The suburb of Frankwell, was in 1234, during the wars of Henry III. and
Llewellin Prince of Wales, reduced to ashes by the Welsh army.

Shrewsbury was the first place in England in which that dreadful
epidemic, the Sweating Sickness, broke out in the year 1551; and there is
a tradition that it made its first appearance in a passage in Frankwell,
called the White Horse Shut.  This disease again appeared in this suburb
in the early part of June 1650, and continued its ravages throughout the
town until the middle of the January following.  It is said that the
Butchers escaped the pestilence; and the fact of there being fewer
entries of burials in the register of St. Alkmund’s, the parish in which
they chiefly resided during that time, tends greatly to confirm the
tradition.

About the middle of Frankwell on the right hand side, stands



ST. GEORGE’S CHURCH.


                      [Picture: St. George’s Church]

This neat structure was erected in 1829, on a site presented to the
parish by Richard Drinkwater, Esq. and designed as a chapel of ease to
St. Chad’s Church.  It is constructed of free-stone, in the lancet style
of architecture, and comprises a nave, transept, chancel, and western
tower.  The interior is fitted up with due regard to elegance and
convenience, and will contain a congregation of 750 persons, for 460 of
whom free kneelings are provided.  By the pious liberality of the late
Rev. Richard Scott, B.D. of this town, the chancel has been graced with a
carved altar screen and chairs of an architectural Gothic design, the
gallery with a small organ by Fleetwood, and the triple lancet windows
filled with most brilliant and spirited figures of Isaiah, St. Matthew,
and St. Mark, in stained glass, in the execution of which, that ingenious
artist Mr. D. Evans has, if possible, surpassed his previous elegant
productions.  The windows of the transept likewise contain fine stained
glass of a rich and elaborate mosaic pattern, by which a mellowed and
devotional gloom is shed over this portion of the fabric, which
contributes considerably to the imposing effect of the splendid east
window.

The edifice was designed by Mr. Edward Haycock, and erected by Messrs.
Joseph Birch and Sons of this town, at a cost of nearly £4000, raised by
the voluntary subscriptions of the parishioners.  The township of
Frankwell has been assigned as a district parish to this church.

The adjoining eminence is crowned by



MILLINGTON’S HOSPITAL,


founded in 1734, by Mr. James Millington of Shrewsbury, draper, and
endowed with the greater part of his ample fortune.  This charitable
institution consists of a school-master and mistress, who have each a
house and salary, and instruct twenty poor boys and as many girls,
natives of Frankwell.  These children are completely clothed twice in
every year, and at the age of fourteen are clothed and apprenticed with a
small premium, and at the expiration of their first year’s apprenticeship
rewarded with a gratuity, upon their producing a certificate of good
conduct.  Twelve poor men or women selected from the single housekeepers
of Frankwell, or the nearest part of St. Chad’s parish, reside in the
Hospital, to each of whom are allotted two comfortable rooms and a small
garden, with an allowance of £6 per annum, a gown or coat on St. Thomas’s
day, and a load of coals on All Saints’ day.  Gowns or Coats and forty
shillings each are also dispensed every year to ten poor single
housekeepers resident in Frankwell, the eldest of which pensioners in
time, succeeds to a vacancy in the hospital.  The hospitallers and
out-pensioners receive likewise two twopenny loaves weekly.  A chaplain
daily attends and reads prayers.

Two exhibitions of £40 a year each are founded for students of Magdalen
College, Cambridge, to which, scholars originally on the hospital
foundation have the preference, or in default of such, two born in
Frankwell, educated at the Free Schools, and having been one year in the
upper form in the head school are most eligible.

The hospital is a plain brick building.  The central portion surmounted
by a pediment and clock turret comprises the chapel and school-room, and
the houses of the master and mistress, and in the wings on each side are
the apartments of the hospitallers.  A lodge has recently been erected
and the ground in front enclosed from the street by an iron railing.
{176}

We now continue our walk along the undulating eminence, which rises
abruptly from the Severn opposite the Quarry, until we arrive at



KINGSLAND,


a large tract of ground, the common property of the Burgesses, studded
with small enclosures and buildings called “Arbours,” to which the
several incorporated trading companies of the town annually resort in
procession on the second Monday after Trinity Sunday, accompanied by
bands of music, flags, devices emblematical of their crafts, and preceded
by “a king” on horseback, gaily dressed with “crownlets and gauds of rare
device,” either representing the monarch who granted their charters, or
some principal personage of their trades.  The Mayor and Corporation,
attended by many of the respectable inhabitants of the place, visit the
several Companies, and partake of refreshments prepared in their
respective arbours:—

    “Whilst the merry bells ring round,
    And the jocund rebecks sound,
    To many a youth and many a maid
    Dancing in the chequered shade;
    And young and old come forth to play
    On this sunshine holiday,
    Till the live-long day-light fail.”

The pageant of “Shrewsbury Show” originated, no doubt, in the procession
which took place on Corpus Christi day, one of the most splendid
festivals of the Romish Church.  The several Companies, preceded by their
Masters and Wardens, attended the Bailiffs and Corporation, who with the
Abbot and dignified Ecclesiastics of the Abbey, Friaries, and Churches of
the town, clad in their splendid robes, and bearing the Holy Sacrament
under a rich canopy, lighted with innumerable wax tapers, proceeded in
solemn order to a stone cross called the Weeping Cross, without the town.
Here having bewailed their sins, and offered up petitions for a joyous
harvest, they returned in the same order to St. Chad’s church, and
attended the celebration of High Mass.  Three days of unbounded jollity
and recreation followed this magnificent festival.  On the Reformation of
religion this ceremonious procession was of course discontinued, and the
present single day of relaxation and amusement substituted in its stead
by the authorities of the place.

While on the subject of our ancient customs, we must not omit the popular
one of _Heaving_, formerly prevalent over most of the kingdom, but
latterly confined to Shropshire.  Heaving is performed on Easter-Monday,
by men who perambulate the streets, and call at the houses with chairs
gaily adorned with ribbons and flowers, in which they sportively hold
down any young woman they meet, and heaving her up three times, turn her
round and set her down again.  The ceremony invariably concludes with a
hearty kiss, to which is often added by the more opulent of the
inhabitants a small present of money.  On Easter-Tuesday the young women
perform the same ceremony to the men.  This custom is supposed to have
originated in the usage of binding persons in chairs, anciently practised
on Hock Tuesday, or Binding Tuesday, designed to represent the stratagems
employed by the English women to aid their husbands in massacreing the
Danes on St. Brice’s day, 1002.  At the Reformation, this, with many
other old customs, of which the origin was imperfectly remembered, was
_spiritualized_, and intended to represent the Resurrection of our Lord.
For more particulars of the custom of Heaving we would refer the reader
to Brand’s Popular Antiquities, i. 155, and Hone’s Every Day Book; in
which latter excellent work there is a spirited engraving of the
ceremony.

On the north side of Kingsland is



THE HOUSE OF INDUSTRY.


which crowns the steep eminence above the river, from whence a prospect
of the town and environs, more pleasing and comprehensive than can be
obtained from any other station, bursts upon the view.

This handsome brick building was erected in 1765, at an expense of
£12,000, and used for a few years as a Foundling Hospital, until the
funds becoming inadequate to the support of the charity, it was shut up
in 1774.  It was afterwards employed during the American War, as a prison
for Dutch prisoners, until 1784, when it was purchased by the several
parishes of the town, and appropriated to the use of their infirm and
helpless poor, who in their declining years here find a comfortable
shelter from the pitiless compassion of the world, and are supplied with
the decent and wholesome necessaries of life.

Descending the eminence, we cross the river by the ferry, proceed up the
Quarry, down St. John’s Hill, and passing the Talbot Buildings, re-enter
the Market Square, from whence we commenced our perambulation.

                           And now, traveller,
                            our tale is told,
                  and in sending you onward on your way,
                 we would heartily bid you “good speed,”
              with a sincere hope that when in after years,
                       amid the storms and sunshine
                which checquer the great journey of life,
            thy restless memory in the stillness of reflection
                 shall recur to the few incidents which,
                        like oases in the desert,
                    have ministered to thy happiness,
                  recollection may long and fondly dwell
                         on those pleasing hours
                              you spent amid
                           the antient walls of
                               Shrewsbury.




EMINENT NATIVES OF SHREWSBURY;


    WITH REFERENCES TO WORKS IN WHICH THEIR BIOGRAPHIES ARE DETAILED.

                   “There is a history in all men’s lives.”

                                                               SHAKSPEARE.

         Name.             Distinction.         Born.          Died.      References.
Adams, Wm.               divine,           1706              1789       Owen and
                                                                        Blakeway’s
                                                                        History of
                                                                        Shrewsbury, ii.
                                                                        218.  Gent.
                                                                        Mag. March,
                                                                        1789.
Armstead, T.             author,           1662                         Wood’s Athenæ
                                                                        Oxon. iii. 661.
Arnway, John,            divine and        1601              1653       Wood’s Athenæ
                         author,                                        Oxon. iii. 307.
                                                                        Walker’s
                                                                        Sufferings of
                                                                        the Clergy.
Benbow, John,            admiral,          1650              1702       Owen and
                                                                        Blakeway’s
                                                                        History of
                                                                        Shrewsbury, ii.
                                                                        390.
                                                                        Biographia
                                                                        Britannica.
Blakeway, J.             divine and        1765              1826       Gent. Mag.
Brickdale,               topographical                                  xcvi. pt. 1. p.
                         historian,                                     277.
Bowers, John,            Bishop of                           1724
                         Chichester,
Bowen, James,            genealogist,                        1774
Bowen, John,             genealogist,                        1832       Gent. Mag. cii.
                                                                        pt. 2. p. 185.
Burney, Chas.            historian of      1726              1814       Gent. Mag.
                         music, 1726                                    1814.

                                                                        Owen and
                                                                        Blakeway’s
                                                                        Hist. of
                                                                        Shrewsbury, ii.
                                                                        388.  Life by
                                                                        his daughter,
                                                                        Madame
                                                                        d’Arblay.
Churchyard, Thomas,      poet,             1520              1604       Wood’s Athenæ.
                                                                        Oxon.  Life
                                                                        prefixed to
                                                                        Chalmers’ edit.
                                                                        of Churchyard’s
                                                                        Chips.
Costard, Geo.            divine,           1709              1782       Biographia
                         biblical                                       Britannica.
                         critic, &                                      Owen and
                         mathematician,                                 Blakeway’s
                                                                        Hist. of
                                                                        Shrewsbury, ii.
                                                                        388.
Cresset, Edw.            Bishop of         1697              1755
                         Llandaff
Davies, Sneyd,           divine and        1709              1769       Owen and
                         poet,                                          Blakeway’s
                                                                        Hist. of
                                                                        Shrewsbury. ii.
                                                                        387.  Nichols’s
                                                                        Illustrations,
                                                                        i. 485.
Farmer, Hugh,            presbyterian      1714                         Life by Hugh
                         divine and                                     Dodson, Biogr.
                         author,                                        Brit. v. 664.
Greisley, Hen.           divine and                          1678       Wood’s Athenæ.
                         poet,                                          Oxon, iii.
                                                                        1167.
Gwynn,                   architect,
Haynes, Jos.             artist and                          1830       Gent. Mag. c.
                         engraver,                                      pt. 1. p. 379.
Jones, Sir, Thomas,      Lord Chief        1614              1692
                         Justice of the
                         Common Pleas.
Onslow, Rich.            Speaker of the    1528              1571       Owen and
                         House of                                       Blakeway’s
                         Commons,                                       Hist. of
                                                                        Shrewsbury, ii.
                                                                        167.
Orton, Job,              Non-conformist    1717              1783       Life by S.
                         divine                                         Palmer,
                                                                        prefixed to his
                                                                        Letters.  Owen
                                                                        and Blakeway’s
                                                                        Hist. of
                                                                        Shrewsbury, ii.
                                                                        478.
Owen, Hugh,              divine and        1760              1827       Gent. Mag.
                         topographical                                  xcviii. pt. 1.
                         historian,                                     p. 478.
Parkes, James,           artist,           1794              1828       Gent. Mag.
                                                                        xcviii. pt. 1.
                                                                        p. 376.
Pemberton, Thomas,       lawyer and        1763              1833       Gent. Mag.
                         author,                                        ciii. pt. 1. p.
                                                                        377.
Phillips, Ambrose,       poet,             1674              1749       Owen and
                                                                        Blakeway’s
                                                                        Hist. of
                                                                        Shrewsbury, ii.
                                                                        284.
Plantagenet, Rd. Duke    2nd son of        1473              1483
of York,                 Edwd. IV.
Plantagenet, George,     youngest son of
                         Edw. IV.
Price, Samp. D.D.        divine, and       1585              1630       Owen and
                         chaplain to                                    Blakeway’s
                         James I. and                                   Hist. of
                         Charles I.                                     Shrewsbury, ii.
                                                                        212.
Price, Daniel, D.D.      divine,                             1631       Wood’s Athenæ.
                                                                        Oxon.
Scott, John,             Non-conformist
                         divine,
Scott, Jona. Dr.         oriental          1753              1829       Gent. Mag.
                         professor and                                  xcix. pt. 1. p.
                         author,                                        470.
Shrewsbury, Ralph,       Bishop of Bath    elect’d 1329      1363
                         and Wells,
Shrewsbury, Robert,      Biographer of     flo. 1140
                         St. Wenefrede,
Shrewsbury, Robert,      Bishop of         consecrated       1215       Owen and
                         Bangor,           1197                         Blakeway’s
                                                                        Hist. of
                                                                        Shrewsbury, ii.
                                                                        98.
Talbot, Thos.            antiquary,                          1538
Talbot, Robt.            antiquary,                          1558
Taylor, John,            editor of         1704              1776       Some Account of
                         Demosthenes,                                   the antient and
                                                                        present State
                                                                        of Shrewsbury,
                                                                        p. 371.
Thomas, Jno.             Bishop of         translated 1761   1766       Some Account of
                         Salisbury,                                     the antient and
                                                                        present State
                                                                        of Shrewsbury,
                                                                        p. 374.
Tomlins, Thomas,         musician and      1778              1847
                         composer,
Turner, John,            lawyer and                          1680       Wood’s Athenæ.
                         author,                                        Oxon. iii.
                                                                        1269.
Waring, John Scott,      friend and        1749              1819
                         defender of
                         Warren
                         Hastings, and
                         author,
Wooley, Edw.             Bishop of         consecrated                  Wood’s Fasti,
                         Clonfert,         1665                         54.

BIRDS


                 SEEN IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF SHREWSBURY.

    “And now is Mirthe therein, to here
    The birdes how they singen clere,
    The manis and the nightingale,
    And other jollie birdes smale.”

                                          _Chaucer’s Romaunt of the Rose_.

              THE NAMES AND ARRANGEMENT ARE THOSE OF BEWICK.

Falco Buteo,            Buzzard,                Haughmond Hill;
                                                Grinshill; Wrekin.
— Milvus,               Kite,                   Bomere Pool.
— cyaneus,              Hen Harrier,            meadows about
                                                Berwick.
— Pygargus,             Ringtail,               Westfelton Moors.
— Tinnunculus,          Kestrel,                Shrewsbury; Wrekin.
— Nisus,                Sparrow-hawk,           near Castle Foregate;
                                                Old Heath.
Strix Otus,             Long-eared Owl,         Westfelton, but
                                                rarely.
— flammea,              Yellow Owl,             meadows;—Shrewsbury.
— stridula,             Tawny Owl,              very common.
Lanius Excubitor,       Ash-coloured Shrike,    Babin’s Wood, near
                                                Whittington.
— Collurio,             Red-backed Shrike,      Wolf’s Head;
                                                Shottaton; Lowe Bank.
Corvus Corax,           Raven,                  Wrekin; Aston.
— Corone,               Crow,                   every where.
— Cornix,               Hooded Crow,            Weston Lullingfield.
— frugilegus,           Rook,                   common;—Whittington
                                                Castle.
— Monedula,             Jack-daw,               common;—Nesscliffe.
— Pica,                 Magpie,                 common.
— glandarius,           Jay,                    Almond Park; Berwick.
Ampelis Garrulus,       Chatterer,              nr. Oswestry,
                                                occasionally.
Sturnus vulgaris,       Starling,               common; Westfelton.
Turdus viscivorus,      Missel Thrush,          Shrewsbury Castle.
— musicus,              Throstle,               common.
— pilaris,              Fieldfare,              common.
— iliacus,              Redwing,                common.
— Merula,               Blackbird,              common.
— torquatus,            Ring Ouzel,             Breidden Mountains.
Cuculus canorus,        Cuckoo,                 common:—Fairyland,
                                                Westfelton.
Yunx Torquilla,         Wryneck,                Shrewsbury Quarry and
                                                Meole Brace.

                                                (on the authority of
                                                Robert Griffith
                                                Temple, Esq.
                                                Barrister at Law.)
Picus viridis,          Green Woodpecker,       common.
— major and medius,     Pied Woodpecker,        Shrewsbury Quarry,
                                                occasionally.
— minor,                Barred Woodpecker,      Shrewsbury Quarry and
                                                Westfelton.
Sitta europæa,          Nuthatch,               Shrewsbury Quarry.
Upupa Epops,            Hoopoe,                 Rednall, a pair, only
                                                once seen.
Certhia familiaris,     Creeper,                Shrewsbury Quarry.
Loxia curvirostra,      Cross-bill,             on larch trees,
                                                occasional visitors.
— Coccothraustes,       Grosbeak,               farm-yards; at
                                                Nesscliffe, in
                                                company with
                                                sparrows.
— Enucleator,           Pine Grosbeak,          Nesscliffe Hill.
— Chloris,              Green Grosbeak          common in gardens.
— Pyrrhula,             Bullfinch,              common in gardens.
Emberiza Miliaria       Bunting,                hedges and lanes,
                                                common.
— Citrinella,           Yellow Bunting          common in high-roads.
— Schœniclus,           Black-headed Bunting,   Raven Meadow;
                                                Dorsett’s Barn,
                                                Shrewsbury.
Fringilla domestica,    Sparrow,                every where.
— cælebs,               Chaffinch,              common in gardens.
— Carduelis,            Goldfinch,              common in fields.
— Spinus,               Siskin,                 Westfelton, in
                                                flights, but rarely.
— cannabina,            Greater Red-pole.       near
                                                mountains;—Pimhill.
Fringilla linaria,      Lesser Redpole,         on gravel walks.
— linota,               Linnet,                 not uncommon.
Muscicapa               Pied Flycatcher         Westfelton; one pair,
Atricapilla,                                    annually.
— Grisola,              Spotted Flycatcher      very common; about
                                                houses.
Alauda arvensis,        Lark,                   very common in
                                                fields.
— pratensis,            Titlark,                common in fields.
— arborea,              Woodlark,               common; Westfelton.
Motacilla alba,         Pied Wagtail            pools and brooks.
— Boarula,              Grey Wagtail,           farm-yards.
— flava,                Yellow Wagtail          rather common;
                                                ploughed fields.
— Luscinia,             Nightingale,            Sutton Spa; and
                                                Westfelton once.
— Rubecula,             Redbreast,              every where.
— Phœnicurus,           Redstart,               common; orchards and
                                                farm-steads.
Sylvia hortensis,       Garden Warbler          common in high
                        Ruckler,                leafy-sycamores.
Motacilla passerina,    Passerine Warbler,      gardens.
— modularis,            Hedge Warbler,          every where; near
                                                houses.
— Salicaria,            Reed Warbler,           New Inn, near
                                                Dorsett’s Barn.
— Atricapilla,          Black-cap               common;—low bushes
                                                and gardens.
— Sylvia,               White-throat,           common;—woods.
— Trochilus,            Yellow Wren,            Almond Park.
—                       Willow Wren, (Bewick,   common.
                        vol. i. p. 257, 6th
                        ed.)
Motacilla,              Chiff Caff, (Bewick,    common, and generally
                        vol. i. p. 258, 6th     the first arrival.
                        ed.)
Trochilus minor,        Least Willow Wren,      Marsh Hall.
Motacilla Regulus,      Golden-crested Wren,    not uncommon;—firs
                                                and yews.
— Troglodytes,          Wren,                   common;—out-
                                                buildings.
— Oenanthe,             Wheatear,               Haughmond Hill and
                                                Dovaston.
— Rubetra,              Whinchat,               common on gorse
                                                bushes.
— Rubicola,             Stonechat,              Sharpstones Hill.
Parus major,            Greater Titmouse,       very common.
— cæruleus,             Blue Titmouse,          very common.
— ater,                 Coal Titmouse,          not uncommon.
— caudatus,             Long-tailed Titmouse,   hedges and bushes.
— palustris,            Marsh Titmouse          near Shrewsbury.
Hirundo rustica,        Swallow,                common;—chimneys.
— urbica.               Martin,                 common;—churches.
— riparia,              Sand Martin,            common;—Shelton rough
— Apus,                 Swift,                  common;—eaves.
Caprimulgus europæus,   Night-jar,              Nesscliffe;—Haughmond
                                                Hill.
Columba Palumbus,       Ring Dove,              Almond Park; Berwick;
                                                Shelton.
— Turtur,               Turtle Dove,            nr. Preston Boats;
                                                Westfelton.
Phasianus Colchicus,    Pheasant,               woods, parks;—Aston.
Tetrao Perdix,          Partridge,              stubble fields.
— Coturnix,             Quail,                  Shotton and Sandford.
Charadius Pluvialis,    Golden Plover,          very rare; once at
                                                Westfelton.
Ardea major,            Heron,                  Isle: Sandford Pool.
— stellaris,            Bittern,                Sandford Pool; and on
                                                Vyrnwy River.
Scolopax Arquata,       Curlew,                 Source of the Morda,
                                                above Oswestry, in
                                                summer.
— Rusticola             Woodcock,               woods;—Treflach.
— Gallinago,            Snipe,                  wet bogs and springs.
— Gallmula,             Judcock,                bogs and wet meadows.
Tringa Vanellus,        Lapwing,                Ensdon; Twyford
                                                Vownog.
— Hypoleucos,           Common Sandpiper,       occasionally on the
                                                margins of large
                                                pools.
Hæmatopus Ostrolegus,   Oyster-catcher,         near Oswestry,
                                                occasionally in the
                                                winter.
Sturnus Cinclus,        Water Ouzel,            Meole brook and
                                                Morda.
Alcedo Ispida,          Kingfisher,             Meole brook;
                                                Ellesmere Canal.
Rallus aquaticus,       Water Rail,             very uncommon.
Gallinula Crex,         Land-rail,              in long growing hay &
                                                corn.
— chloropus,            Common Gallinule,       pools, common.
Fulica atra,            Coot,                   large pools:
                                                Sandford.
Podiceps minor,         Little Grebe,           weedy pools, not
                                                uncommon.
Larus canus,            Common Gull,            occasionally in
                                                flight.
Procellaria pelagica,   Stormy Petrel,          Prees—found dead.
Anas Anser ferus,       Grey Lag Goose,         large waters:
                                                Baggymore.
— Boschas,              Mallard,                pools; Woodhouse.
— Penelope,             Wigeon,                 pools: Halston.
— Crecca,               Teal,                   river Severn.
Pelecanus Carbo,        Cormorant,              Isle; Montford
                                                Bridge.

For the foregoing list, we are indebted to the kindness of the late JOHN
F. M. DOVASTON, Esq. A.M. of Westfelton, near Shrewsbury, the Friend and
Biographer of Bewick; a gentleman who, with enthusiastic ardour, devoted
many years of unceasing attention and observation, to an accurate
investigation of the varieties and habits of the feathered tribes.




A FEW OF THE
RARER SPECIES OF PLANTS
GROWING IN A WILD STATE IN THE IMMEDIATE VICINITY OF SHREWSBURY.


      The Arrangement adopted is that of the Natural System, and the
         Nomenclature from Babington’s Manual of British Botany.

       “what skill, what force divine,
    Deep felt, in these appear!”

                                                                  THOMSON.

Ranunculus Lingua,                  Bomere and Hancott pools.
— auricomus,                        Haughmond Hill; Shelton Wood.
— arvensis,                         corn-fields.
— parviflorus,                      near Red-barn: Pulley;
                                    Sharpstones Hill.
Berberis vulgaris,                  Sharpstones Hill.
Papaver Argemone,                   fields, near Bank farm.
Corydalis claviculata,              Pimhill.
Fumaria micrantha,                  near Harwood’s Boat-house.
Nasturtium palustre,                banks of Severn.
— sylvestre,                        banks of Severn.
Turritis glabra,                    Berwick Knolls.
Cardamine amara,                    banks of Severn between Preston
                                    Boats and Uffington.
Diplotaxis tenuifolia,              Shrewsbury Abbey ruins.
Cochlearia Danica,                  Dominican Friary, Shrewsbury.
Thlaspi arvense,                    corn-fields near Shrewsbury.
Teesdalia nudicaulis,               Haughmond and Sharpstones hill.
Viola palustris,                    Bomere and Almond Park pools.
— sylvatica,                        Weir Coppice.
Drosera longifolia,                 Bomere pool.
Elatine hexandra,                   Bomere pool.
Dianthus plumarius,                 Haughmond Abbey.
— deltoides,                        Sharpstones Hill and Downton.
Saponaria officinialis and var:     Haughmond Abbey.
flore pleno,
Mœnchia erecta,                     Haughmond Hill.
Alsine rubra,                       Pimhill; Haughmond Hill.
Hypericum elodes,                   Bomere and Oxon pools.
— humifusum,                        near Sundorne.
— maculatum,                        Haughmond hill and Meole Brace.
— pulchrum,                         Sharpstones hill.
Geranium Pyrenaicum,                road-side near Bicton Grove.
— columbinum,                       Pulley.
— lucidum                           near the Lea; Wrentnall.
Rhamnus Frangula,                   Bomere pool.
Ulex nanus,                         Kingsland; Sharpstones hill;
                                    Haughmond hill.
Genista Anglica,                    Bomere pool.
Vicia sylvatica,                    Shelton rough.
Lathyrus sylvestris,                near Pimley; Shelton rough.
Orobus tuberosus,                   Sharpstones hill.
Geum rivale,                        old course of Severn, under Cross
                                    hill.
Comarum palustre,                   Bomere, Berrington, and Hancott
                                    pools.
Rubus suberectus,                   Almond Park.
— fissus,                           Almond Park.
— plicatus,                         Shawbury Heath.
— affinis,                          Shawbury Heath.
— nitidus,                          generally about Shrewsbury.
— tenuis,                           about Shrewsbury.
— corylifolius and var.             London-road; Coleham; Flash.
— cordifolius and var.              Almond Park.
— discolor,                         generally about Shrewsbury.
— — δ. argenteus,                   Berwick.
— leucostachys β. vestitus,         Crowmeole; Almond Park.
— — y. argenteus,                   Copthorn.
— sylyaticus,                       Almond Park.
— carpinifolius,                    Almond Park.
— macrophyllus,                     Almond Park.
Rubus macrophyllus,                 Haughmond hill.
β. Schlechtendalii,
— Babingtonii,                      Almond Park.
— rudis,                            hedges & woods about Shrewsbury.
— β. Leightonii,                    Haughmond hill; Cross hill;
                                    Berwick-road.
— fusco-ater,                       hedges generally
— — γ. echinatus.                   Almond Park.
— hirtus,                           Almond Park.
— glandulosus, γ. rosaceus,         Almond Park.
— Schleicheri,                      Flash; Haughmond hill; Red hill.
— nemorosus,                        Haughmond hill; Weir Coppice.
— cæsius α. aquaticus,              Flash.
— — δ. ferox,                       hedges near Greenfields.
Rosa villosa,                       near Shrewsbury.
Cratægus Oxyacantha, α.             hedges near Shrewsbury.
Pyrus Malus, α. & β.                hedges near Shrewsbury.
Peplis Portula,                     Bomere pool.
Myriophyllum alterniflorum,         Berrington pool.
Montia fontana,                     Bomere pool.
Cotyledon Umbilicus,                Haughmond hill.
Sedum Telephium,                    Haughmond hill.
— Forsterianium,                    Haughmond hill.
— reflexum,                         Shrewsbury Abbey walls.
Saxifraga granulata,                near Harwood’s Boat-house.
Chrysosplenium alternifolium,       Shelton wood.
Smyrnium Olusatrum,                 Shrewsbury Castle mound.
Sambucus Ebulus,                    Exford Green,
Valerianella dentata,               fields near Bomere pool.
Inula Conyza,                       Nobold.
Artemisia Absinthium,               Bomere pool.
Cichorium Intybus,                  Welbatch.
Hieracium boreale,                  Bickley Coppice.
Lobelia Dortmanna,                  Bomere and Berrington pools.
Campanula patula,                   banks of Severn, near Bickley
                                    Coppice; Berrington.
Vaccinium Oxycoccus,                Bomere pool.
Hyoscyamus niger,                   Haughmond Abbey.
Lathræa squamaria,                  Council-house garden.
Linaria Cymbalaria,                 Council-house walls;—naturalized.
— Elatine,                          near Sharpstones hill.
Orobanche major,                    Sharpstones hill.
Limosella aquatica,                 Shelton rough.
Veronica scutellata,                Bomere pool.
— montana,                          Almond Park; Shelton wood.
— polita,                           cultivated ground, Shrewsbury.
Galeopsis versicolor,               Calcott.
Ballota ruderalis,                  Bomere pool.
Lamium amplexicaule,                Lyth hill.
Calamintha officinalis,             Red hill.
Scutellaria minor,                  Haughmond hill; Oxon pool.
Utricularia minor,                  Bomere pool.
Hottonia palustris,                 Bomere pool; near Albright
                                    Hussey.
Lysimachia vulgaris,                Almond park pool.
Anagallis cærulea,                  near Shotton.
— tenella,                          Haughmond hill; Abbot’s Betton
                                    pool.
Littorella lacustris,               Bomere pool.
Plantago Coronopus,                 Lyth hill.
Chenopodium Bonus Henricus,         Uffington, &c.
Rumex maritimus,                    Hancott pool.
— pratensis,                        Hancott pool.
— Hydrolapathum,                    New Park.
Polygonum Bistorta,                 Sutton; Meole Brace.
Euphorbia exigua,                   fields near Bomere pool.
— Lathyris,                         cultivated ground, Shrewsbury.
— amygdaloides,                     Almond Park: Lyth hill.
Butomus umbellatus,                 river Severn, and canal.
Alisma ranunculoides,               Berrington pool.
— natans,                           Hancott pool.
Sagittaria sagittifolia,            Canal between Shrewsbury and
                                    Uffington.
Scheuchzeria palustris,             Bomere pool.
Zannichellia palustris,             Bomere.
Habenaria viridis,                  Bomere woods.
— chlorantha,                       Bomere woods.
Epipactis latifolia,                Bomere woods.
Convallaria majalis,                Pimhill.
Colchicum autumnale,                fields near Dorsett’s barn;
                                    Sutton.
Typha angustifolia,                 Berrington pool.
Potamogeton oblongus,               Bomere pool.
— rufescens,                        pit near Sharpstones hill.
— heterophyllus,                    Berrington pool.
Sparganium natans,                  Bomere pool.
— simplex,                          Berrington pool.
Rhynchospora alba,                  Bomere pool.
Eriophorum vaginatum,               Bomere and Hancott pools.
Carex curta,                        Bomere pool.
— ovalis,                           Bomere pool.
Carex muricata var: β. (_Smith_.)   Sharpstones hill.
— divulsa,                          Cloud Coppice, Berrington.
— teretiuscula,                     Bomere pool.
— pseudo-cyperus,                   Bomere and Hancott pools; Canal.
— limosa,                           Bomere pool.
— vesicaria,                        Bomere pool.
— ampullacea.                       Bomere pool.
— filiformis,                       Bomere and Berrington pools.
Phalaris arundinacea,               banks of Severn.
Brachypodium sylvaticum,            woods and hedge banks.

                                * * * * *

For more ample details of the Botany of Shrewsbury and its vicinity, the
reader is referred to Leighton’s Flora of Shropshire.




INDEX.

                                                                  PAGE
ABBEY, 124—founded, 124—endowment, 126—dissolution,                128
126—present remains of, 129—church, 129—western window,
130—armorial bearings in, 131—tower, 131—altar screen,
134—font, 135—north porch, 135—tombs in, 136—patronage of
the living, 128—descent of the abbatial property,
127—church estate
Abbey-foregate                                                     155
Abbots of Shrewsbury attended Parliaments                          124
Abbot’s lodging                                                    143
Acton Burnell, Parliament of, 126—Statute of                       126
Agricultural Shows                                                  51
Aldermen                                                             8
Alkmund’s, St. church, 94—old church, 96—new church                 97
Allatt, Mr. John, monument to                                      103
—’s Charity school                                                 118
Almond Park                                                         53
Almshouses, St. Mary’s                                              83
— St. Chad’s                                                       113
— St. Giles’s                                                      153
— Evans’s, (Meole)                                                 157
Anderson’s tomb                                                     82
Antiquities in Free School Library                                  46
“Arbours”                                                          176
Ashton, Thomas, first head master of Free School                    27
Atcham village, church, and bridge                                 154
Attingham Hall                                                     154
Bailiffs                                                             8
Baptists’ Meeting-house                                            168
Barker Street                                                      168
Barker, Thomas, birth-place of                                     157
—’s Delight, or the Art of Angling                                 157
Baths, Royal                                                        52
Battlefield, 56—college and church, 56—monument in                  56
Battle of Shrewsbury, 61, 175—execution of prisoners,              162
17—interments of slain, 61
Beechey’s, Sir William, portrait of Lord Hill                        7
Bell Stone Mansion                                                 169
Belle Vue                                                          157
Belmont                                                            113
Benbow Place                                                        52
— Admiral, birth-place of                                           52
— monument to                                                       78
— portrait of                                                        7
Bennette’s Halle                                                    15
Bernard, St. life of, stained glass                                 74
Berwick house, chapel, and hospital                                 53
Bevan’s “Records of the Salop Infirmary”                            86
Billiard Room                                                       13
Birds                                                              186
Bishopric of Shrewsbury                                            127
Blakeway, Rev. J. B. monument to                                    72
Blase St. Chapel of                                                117
Blue School                                                        121
“Boards” of Shrewsbury School                                       33
Bomere Pool                                                        157
Boucher, John, Bishop of Shrewsbury                                127
Bowdler’s Charity School                                           121
Brick building first erected in Shrewsbury                         170
Bridge, English or Stone                                           121
— old                                                              122
— Welsh                                                            171
— old, or St. George’s, 11                                         171
— Railway, 47, 52, 53, 59                                          123
British fortress, remains of, 23—princes, palace of                110
Britons, first inhabited by                                        104
Broadwell                                                           52
Brown School                                                       123
Butler, Bishop, 32—armorial bearings                                71
— statue to                                                         81
— portrait of                                                       46
Butcher Row, 16                                                     99
Butter Cross, old, 16—new                                           16
Cadman’s monument                                                   82
Canal, Shrewsbury and Ellesmere                                     57
Carline’s, Mr. John, skill in Gothic architecture, 67, 73          134
Catherine’s, St., Chapel                                            76
Castle Street                                                       18
Castle 23—situation of, 23—founded by Roger de Montgomery,          26
25—gateway of, 21—keep, 23—rebuilt by Edward I.,
26—besieged in the civil wars
— Gates, 11, 47—Foregate                                            54
Cemetery, Abbey                                                    129
Cemetery, Dissenters’                                              157
Chad’s, Saint, Church, remains of old, 107—burnt, 111—fall         110
of, 109—collegiate establishment
— New Church, 162—College                                          112
— Almshouses, 113—figure of                                        167
Chantry Chapels in St. Mary’s church, 70                            76
Charles I. portrait of, 14—lodged at the Council House,            146
21—received Sacrament at St. Mary’s, 64—addresses army
Charles II. portrait of                                              7
Charlotte, Queen of George III, portrait of                          7
Charlton Hall                                                      168
Charleton, Lords of Powis, 75                                      168
Charters                                                             8
Cholera                                                            153
Christ Church, Oxon.                                               177
Church Street                                                       93
Church of England Literary and Scientific Institute                 90
Circus                                                             170
Clive, Lord, portrait of                                            89
Coal Depôt of Railway                                               50
— — Shropshire, and Staffordshire                                   50
— — Welsh                                                           50
— wharfs                                                            57
Coleham                                                            155
College Hill                                                       114
Column, Lord Hill’s                                                146
Corbet Monument in Battlefield Church                               56
Corn Market                                                         11
Corporation                                                          8
Corpus Christi procession                                          176
Coton Hill                                                          53
Council House, 20—gateway, 19—hall and great chamber                20
— of the Marches of Wales                                           20
Councilmen                                                           8
County Goal                                                         57
Courts of Assize                                                     6
Cross, High, 17—Street                                              54
Crucifixion, sculpture of                                          142
“Dana,” the                                                         59
David, last British Prince of Wales, trial of                      126
— execution of                                                      17
Depôt, the                                                         154
Dingle                                                             160
Dogpole                                                             91
Dominican, or Black Friars                                          60
Dormitory, Monks’                                                  141
Douglas, Earl, death of                                             57
Drapers’ Company                                                    85
— Hall, 85—curious apartment in, 85—portraits in                    85
Dry Dingle, remains of amphitheatre in                             161
Durer, Albert, stained glass by                                     74
Ebenezer Meeting-house                                             119
Edward I., keep of the Castle erected by                            24
— rebuilds Castle                                                   24
Edward III., statue of                                             131
Edward IV., portrait of                                             85
— occasional residence of                                           60
— Queen of                                                          61
Edward VI., portrait of                                             46
Eleanor’s (Queen) Bower                                             57
Elizabeth, Queen, armorial bearings of                              10
Evans’s Almshouses                                                 157
Evans, Mr. D., skill in glass staining, 55, 71, 79, 134,           174
149, 164
Evans, R. Esq., portrait of Admiral Owen                             7
Exchequer                                                            5
Fairs for Cattle 11, 51,—Horses                                     52
Farm yard, existence of an ancient                                   5
Farquhar, George                                                    18
Flora of Shropshire                                                191
Fonts, in St. Mary’s church, 76—Abbey, 135—St. Giles,              165
163—St. Chad’s
Foundation of Shrewsbury by the Britons                              2
Frankwell, suburb of, 172—sweating sickness in                     172
Freehold Land Society                                               57
Free Schools, 26—endowment and revenues, 27,                        43
28—scholarships and exhibitions, 29—masters,
31—instruction, 31—school rooms, 43—chapel, 44—library,
45—eminent men educated at, 31, 45—“boards” of, 33—gateway
Friars, Austin, 161—Dominican, 60—Franciscan or Grey               158
Gas-works                                                           57
Gates of the Town—Waterlane, 60—Castle Gates, 11                    47
Gateway of the Castle, 22—Council House                             19
“Genealogy of Christ from Jesse,” stained glass                     74
George’s, St. Church, 173—stained glass in                         174
George I., portrait of                                               7
George II., portrait of, 7—III., portrait of                         7
Giles’s, St. Church, 148—stained glass in, 149—tombs in,           151
150—font, 150—cross, 152—restoration
— Hospital, endowment of, 153—appointment of master                153
Glass, stained, in St. Michael’s Church, 60—in St. Mary’s           45
Church, 69, 71, 74, 75, 77, 79, 82—in St. Alkmund’s Church,
97—in St. Julian’s Church, 102—in Abbey Church, 132, 133—in
St. Giles’s Church, 149—in Trinity Church, 157—in St.
Chad’s Church, 164—in St. George’s Church, 174—in Free
School Library
Goods Depôt of Railway                                              57
Government, local                                                    8
Government School of Art and Design                                117
Guesten Hall of Abbey                                              143
Guild Hall, ancient                                                  4
— merchant                                                           8
— House of the Fraternity of the Holy Cross                         99
— of St. Wenefrede, 125—Ditto of B. V. Mary                        105
Hazledine, Wm., bust of                                            166
Haughmond Hill, 57—Abbey, 57—origin of the name                     57
— Abbots of, town house of                                         169
Head masters of Free Schools, portraits of                          46
Heaving, custom of                                                 179
Henry I., privilege conferred by                                     8
— II., first charter granted by                                      8
— III., guild merchant recognized by charter of                      8
— VII., house in which he lodged                                   104
— VIII., portrait of                                                46
High Street                                                         14
Hill, Lord, portrait of, 7, 89—Column in honour of                 146
Hill, Sir Rowland, Bart., portrait of                               89
Hill’s Lane                                                        169
— Mansion                                                          170
History of Shrewsbury                                                3
Holy Cross, Church of the                                          129
Hospital for lepers, 162                                           167
Hospital of the Holy Cross                                         143
House of Industry                                                  180
Howard Street                                                       57
— Bust of, by Bacon                                                 58
Independent Meeting-house, 47, 118                                 168
Infirmary, Salop, 86—view from terrace of, 89—Monks’               140
Inscription on Blakeway’s Monument                                  73
Inscription on Bishop Butler’s do. 81—on Wigram’s do.               80
— on Benbow’s ditto                                                 78
Ireland’s Mansion, 14—family, armorial bearings of                  15
James II. kept his Court at Council House                           21
John’s, St. Hill                                                   167
— or Wesleyan Methodist Meeting-house                              167
Jones’s Mansion                                                     90
— Lord Chief Justice, 90—monument of                                98
Jones, Thomas, Esq., first Mayor of Shrewsbury                      90
Judges’ Lodgings                                                   114
Julian’s, St., Church, 100—stained glass in, 102—tombs in          103
Juliana, St., ancient sculpture of                                 102
Kingsland                                                          176
Keep of the Castle                                                  24
Kennedy, Rev. B. H., D.D.                                           32
Knights of the Shire, ceremony relative to                          25
Laura’s Tower                                                       24
Lawrence, Mr. Robert, monument to                                  103
Leaton Shelf                                                        53
Lepers, Hospital of                                                153
Leybourne Chapel, 78—Monument                                       79
Lilleshall Abbey                                                    96
Llewellyn, Prince of Wales                                          64
Longner Hall                                                       155
Lunatic Asylum                                                     177
Magistrates                                                          8
Manufactures of Shrewsbury                                           2
Manufactory of Linen Thread                                         57
Mardol                                                             169
Market Square, 9—antique appearance of                               9
— House, 9—Cattle, 51—Corn, 11—General, 11—New Butter and            9
Cheese, 57—Vegetable
Mary, Queen, accession, 92—President of Marches,—92                 92
armorial bearings
Mary’s, Saint, Church, 62—collegiate buildings, 17—Royal            77
Peculiar, 63—patronage, 63—extent of parish,
64—architecture of, 64—dimensions, 65—tower and spire,
65—porches, 66—nave, 66—organ screen, 67—carved wooden
ceiling, 67—ancient choir, 70—stone pulpit, 70—triple
lancet window, 74—transept, 70—stained glass in, 69, 71,
74, 76, 77, 79, 82, 89—font, 76—monuments, 71, 77, 79, 80,
82—chancel, 73—chantry chapels, 73
Mary’s, St., Almshouses, 83—Turnstile                               89
Mayor                                                                8
Mechanics’ Institute                                                11
Meole Brace Village, 157—Bridge, 157—Brook                         157
Mercer’s Company                                                   113
Mercers’ Hall                                                      113
Merivale                                                           123
Methodists’, Wesleyan, Meeting-house, 57                           167
— Calvinist, Meeting-house                                         168
Michael’s, St., Chapel in the Castle                                25
Michael’s, St., Church, 54—stained glass in                         55
— schools                                                           55
Millington’s Hospital                                              175
Monk’s Dormitory                                                   141
— Infirmary                                                        140
Montgomery, Roger de, statue of                                     24
— founder of the castle                                             25
Monuments in St. Mary’s church, 71, 72, 77, 78, 79, 80              82
— St. Julian’s church, 103—St. Chad’s church                       165
— St. Alkmund’s church, 98—Abbey church                            136
Murivance                                                          119
Museum of the Shropshire and North Wales Natural History           115
and Antiquarian Society
Music Hall                                                          13
Mysteries, or Miracle Plays                                        161
Mytton, family of                                                  114
Name, Saxon, of Shrewsbury                                           2
Natives, eminent                                                   182
Natural History and Antiquarian Society                            115
News Room                                                           13
Nicholas, St., Chapel of                                            18
Norman Earls of Shrewsbury                                           8
— fortress, remains of                                              21
“Olde House,” 91—ancient paintings in                               91
— inscription in                                                    92
Ordericus Vitalis                                                  154
Organs in Music Hall, 13—St. Mary’s Church, 68—St.                 165
Michael’s, 55—St. Alkmund’s, 97—St. Julian’s, 102—Abbey,
152—Trinity, 157—St. George’s, 174—St. Chad’s
Organ Screen in St. Mary’s Church                                   67
Owen, Admiral, portrait of                                           7
— Archdeacon, Monument of                                          103
Owens of Condover                                                   20
Paintings at Sundorne Castle                                        56
Palace of the British Princes                                      110
Parliament of Shrewsbury, called the Great                         126
— Edward I., 1283, held in the Abbey                               126
Pavement, High                                                      17
Percy, Earl of Worcester, corpse of                                 79
Persons eminent, educated at the Free Schools, 31                   33
“Pest-basin”                                                       152
Plague, visitations of                                             152
Plantagenet, Geo., son of Edward IV.                                61
Plants, wild                                                       191
Platforms, Railway                                                  49
Police Station                                                      13
Population of Shrewsbury                                             2
Portraits in Free School Library                                    46
— at the Infirmary, 97—Town Hall                                     7
Post Office Old                                                    106
Post Office                                                         13
Poultry Market                                                      16
Pride Hill                                                          17
— family of, 17—mansion 17                                          17
Prince, Richard, Esq.                                              145
Prisoners at Battle of Shrewsbury                                   17
Prison Charities                                                    58
“Proud Salopians,” origin of the term                              127
Public Rooms                                                        12
Pulpit, Stone, in the Abbey Refectory                              141
Quakers’ Meeting-house                                             167
Quarry, the                                                        159
Quays                                                              170
“Queen Eleanor’s Bower”                                             57
Race Course                                                        146
Railway, Shrewsbury and Birmingham                                  51
Railway, Shrewsbury and Chester                                     51
— Shrewsbury and Hereford                                           51
— Bridge, 47, 52, 53, 59, 123—Viaduct, 59—Station                   47
— Platforms, 49—Goods, &c. Depôt                                    50
Raven Inn                                                           18
Raven Meadow                                                        51
“Recruiting Officer,” Comedy of                                     18
Reformation of Religion                                            111
Richard, Duke of York, Statue of                                    10
Roger de Montgomery, Statue of                                      24
Roman Antiquities in Free Schools Library                           46
— Catholic Meeting-house                                           120
Roushill Walls                                                     120
Rowland, Rev. W. G., pious munificence of, 55, 67                  151
Rowley’s Mansion, 170—Memorial, 70                                  71
Rupert, Prince                                                      90
Sandemanians, or Scotch Baptists’, Meeting-House                   168
Scott, Rev. R., pious munificence of, 103, 134, 139, 152,          174
157, 164
— monuments to, 98, 139                                            166
Seal of Churchwardens of Abbey                                     128
Severn, 1                                                          157
“Sextry,” the                                                      112
Sharpstones Hill                                                   157
Shearman’s Hall, 105—Company                                       105
Shelton Oak, 177—Shelton                                           177
Sherar’s Mansion, 121—“Shermen’s Tree,” the                        105
Shoplatch                                                          169
Shrewsbury, situation of, 1—Saxon name of, 2—population,           127
2—manufactures, 2—foundation, 3—history, 3—siege,
6—intended to be made a bishopric
— Show                                                             178
— Richard, Duke of York                                             61
Shutt Place                                                        169
Sidney, Sir Henry                                                  112
Simpson, Mr., bust of                                              166
Smith, Mr. S. Pountney, skill in Ecclesiastical                     70
Architecture, 66
Smithfield                                                          51
“Soldier’s Piece”                                                  146
Spire of St. Mary’s Church                                          66
— St. Alkmund’s Ditto                                               97
Stamp Office                                                        13
Station, Railway                                                    47
Street Act Office                                                   13
Suffragan Bishops                                                  127
Sundorne Castle, 56—paintings in                                    56
Sutton Spa                                                         153
Swan Hill                                                          118
Sweating Sickness, 152                                             172
Talbot Buildings                                                    13
Tankerville Place                                                  144
Taylor, Dr. John                                                    27
Theatre                                                            168
Thomas Lewis, Suffragan Bishop of Salop                            127
Thorpe, Master William                                             111
Timber Houses, ancient, 9, 16, 19, 99, 104, 106                    123
Tomb of Thomas Percy, Earl of Worcester, 79—Earl Roger de          159
Montgomery, 136—a Judge, 136—a Priest, 137—Sir Walter de
Dunstanville, 137—a Hermit, 137—Charlton family, 137—Onslow
family, 138—Jones’s family, 138—Edwardes’s family,
139—Alderman Lloyd, 139—Rev. R. Scott, 139—Masters of St.
Giles’s Hospital, 150—“Confessor Burton,” 155—Lady Hawise
Charleton
Tower on Town Walls                                                119
Town, armorial bearings of                                          11
Town Walls, remains and former extent of                           120
— Hall, 4—old, 5—new                                                 6
Trade in Welsh woollen cloths                                       86
Trinity Church                                                     156
Trinity aisle                                                       78
Unitarian Meeting-house                                            168
Uriconium, 2                                                       155
Vaughan’s Mansion, 14                                              114
Vegetable Market                                                     9
Viaduct, Railway                                                    59
View from Terrace of Infirmary                                      89
View from Coton Hill Railway Bridge                                 53
Vineyard, Abbots’                                                   61
Walls, Town, remains of                                            120
Walnut Tree at White Hall                                          144
Wards                                                                8
Water works                                                         52
Water-lane                                                          60
Water-lane Gateway                                                  60
Watur, Degory, 83—portrait of                                       85
Weeping Cross, 135                                                 177
Wenefrede, St., 125—translation of, 125, 149—chantry               135
White Hall                                                         144
White Hall Place                                                   144
William III., portrait of                                            7
Wrekin                                                             156
Wroxeter, 3, 155—church, 155—tombs in                              156
Wyle, top of the                                                   104
— Cop                                                              104

                                * * * * *

                                 THE END.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

             Printed by JOHN DAVIES, High Street, Shrewsbury.




STREETS. {i}


_Names_.

                                                   _Principal Objects in_.

ABBEY FOREGATE—Abbey Church, 129—Reader’s Pulpit, 141—Hospital of Holy
Cross, 143—White Hall, 144—Lord Hill’s Column, 146—St. Giles’s Church,
148—Depôt, 154

BARKER STREET—Austin Friars, 161—Bell Stone Mansion, 169

BELMONT—Old St. Chad’s Church, 107

BUTCHER ROW—Timber Mansion, 16, 99

CASTLE STREET—Raven Inn, 18—St. Nicholas’s Chapel, 18—Council House,
19—Castle, 21—Free Schools, 26

CASTLE GATE—Railway Station, 47—Smithfield, 51

CASTLE FOREGATE—St. Michael’s Church, 54—Linen Manufactory, 57

CHURCH STREET—St. Alkmund’s Church, 94

COLEHAM—Trinity Church, 156

COLLEGE HILL—Vaughan’s Mansion, 114—Museum, 115—School of Art, 117

COTON HILL—Water Works, 52—Benbow Place, 52

DOGPOLE—St. Mary’s Almshouses, 83—Jones’s Mansion, 90—Church Institute,
90—“Olde House,” 91

FRANKWELL—St. George’s Church, 173—Millington’s Hospital, 175

HIGH STREET—Ireland’s Mansion, 14—Old Post Office, 106—Shearman’s Hall,
105—Unitarian Meeting-House, 168

HILL’S LANE—Rowley’s Mansion, 170

HOWARD STREET—Cheese and Butter Market Hall, 57

ST. JOHN’S HILL—St. John’s Wesleyan Methodist Meeting-House, 167—Quakers’
Meeting-House, 167—Charleton Mansion, 168—Theatre, 168

MARDOL—Welsh Bridge, 171

MARKET SQUARE—Market Hall, 9—Town Hall, 4—Mechanics’ Institution, 11—News
Room, 13—Police Station, 13—Public Rooms, 12—Post Office, 13—Music Hall,
13

ST. MARY’S PLACE—St. Mary’s Church, 62—Drapers’ Hall, 85—Infirmary, 86

MERIVALE—Brown School, 123

MURIVANCE—Allatt’s School, 118—Ebenezer Meeting-House, 119—Tower on Town
Walls, 119—Roman Catholic Meeting-House, 120—Bowdler’s School, 121

PRIDE HILL—“Bennette’s Halle,” 15—Butter Cross, 16

QUARRY TERRACE—St. Chad’s Church, 162

SHOPLATCH—Abbot of Haughmond’s Mansion, 169

SWAN HILL—Independent Meeting-House, 118

WYLE COP—St. Julian’s Church, 100—English Bridge, 121

                                * * * * *




The Shrewsbury Guide Advertiser.


                                                           _August_, 1855.

                                * * * * *



W. WOOLRICH’S
COMMERCIAL DINING AND GENERAL
Refreshment Rooms,
WITHIN TWO MINUTES WALK OF THE RAILWAY STATION,
_On the same side at the Royal Free Grammar School_,


                        CASTLE STREET, SHREWSBURY.

The above Establishment possesses all the advantages, comforts and
convenience of an Inn and General Boarding House, rendering every
accommodation and great facility to commercial travellers and visitors,
being situate at equal distances between the Market and Railway Station,
in the immediate vicinity of the Castle, the Grammar School, and St.
Mary’s Church, three of the principal ornaments of the town.

                 → AN ORDINARY EVERY DAY AT ONE O’CLOCK.

                 _Prime Shropshire Ale.—Well-aired Beds_.

                                * * * * *



T. HARRIS,
Wholesale and Retail Confectioner,


          Corner of the School Lane, Castle Street, Shrewsbury,

      Manufacturer of the celebrated SHREWSBURY CAKES, Bride Cakes,
              and every kind of Biscuits and Confectionery.

     _Dealer in British Wines_, _Fruits_, _Potted Meat_, _&c._ _&c._

    A comfortable Private Room is kept to accommodate visitors wishing
          to sit down and partake of any of the above articles.

                                * * * * *



LONDON HOUSE,
General Stay & Bonnet Establishment.


                                * * * * *

                                HERBERT’S
                           WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
                        LINEN AND WOOLLEN DRAPERY,
                   Silk Mercery, Hosiery, Haberdashery,
                                   AND

                           GLOVE ESTABLISHMENT,
                         PRIDE HILL, SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *

                          A LARGE ASSORTMENT OF
                     MANTLES, MILLINERY, BABY LINEN,
                         STRAW BONNETS AND STAYS.

                                  —_o_—

     Gloves, Ribbons, Flowers, Blonds, Lace, and every other article
                   in the Drapery and Millinery Trade.

                                  —_o_—

                 UMBRELLAS AND PARASOLS IN GREAT VARIETY.

            _A great variety of Widows’ Caps always on hand_.

           Funerals completely Furnished, Family Mourning, &c.

                                * * * * *

                   [Picture: Picture of three archers]



SAMUEL HULME,
HAIR CUTTER & PERFUMER,
HIGH STREET, SHREWSBURY,


Begs to inform the Nobility and Public in general, that he has on hand an
assortment of all kinds of Archery from the first manufacturers in
London, also Cricket Bats, Balls, and Wickets; Umbrellas, Oiled Silks and
Bathing Caps; Combs of all kinds, Hair, Tooth, Cloth, and Nail Brushes,
Turkey and Honey-Comb Sponges; Ornamental Hair, of the newest fashion;
Toys, Writing Desks, Work Boxes, and genuine Perfumery.

          Only Agent in Salop for the improved TURKISH HAIR DYE.
      _The whole of the Stock is now Selling Off at Reduced Prices_.
                  S. H. returns thanks for past favours.

                                * * * * *

                   CABINET, UPHOLSTERY, & PAPER HANGING
                              ESTABLISHMENT,
                       9, HIGH STREET, SHREWSBURY,
                LATELY OCCUPIED BY MESSRS. T. & S. POOLE.

                                * * * * *



HENRY PROBERT,
PROPRIETOR,


                                * * * * *

             Paper Hangings of the newest London and Parisian
                      Designs, at moderate charges.

          Experienced Hands sent to any part of Town or Country.
     Chairs, Sofas, Dining and Loo Tables, Feather Beds, Mattresses,
              Patent Floor Cloths, Rugs, Mats, Matting, &c.
       Furniture and Cabinet Work of first-rate quality, and every
                    Article connected with the Trade.

                                * * * * *



HENRY ATKIN,
WINE AND SPIRIT MERCHANT,


                         HIGH STREET, SHREWSBURY,

                       _Sole Agent for the sale of_

                     ALLSOPP’S EAST INDIA, PALE, AND
                            OTHER BURTON ALES,
                    REID & Co’s SUPERIOR LONDON STOUT
                               PORTERS, AND
                   GUINNESS, SONS & Co.’s DUBLIN STOUT,

              _In Wood and Bottle_, _Wholesale and Retail_.

                                * * * * *



Bull’s Head Commercial Inn, & Posting House,
CASTLE GATES, SHREWSBURY.


                                * * * * *

                              ROBERT GLOVER

Respectfully invites the attention of Commercial Gentlemen, Farmers,
Dealers and others, to the above old established Inn, where they will
find superior accommodation combined with moderate charges.

           Post Horses, Flys, Gigs, &c. on the shortest notice.

         Good Stabling.  Lock-up Coach Houses.  Well-aired Beds.
               _An Ordinary every Saturday at One o’clock_.
      Observe—BULL’S HEAD INN, adjoining the Railway Station, within
                  One Minutes walk of the Cattle Market.

                                * * * * *



The late J. F. M. Dovaston, Esq.  M.A.


                          In 8vo. sd.  Price 8d.

THREE POPULAR LECTURES; ONE on NATURAL HISTORY, and TWO on NATIONAL
MELODY, By John F. M. Dovaston, Esq. M.A.

                                * * * * *

          Published by JOHN DAVIES, 15, High Street, Shrewsbury.

                                * * * * *

                      [Picture: Royal coat of arms]



W. ARMSTRONG,
WOOLLEN DRAPER,
Tailor & Habit Maker,


                       11, HIGH STREET, SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *

                WATERPROOF TWEED, AND MELTON CLOTH CLOAKS.

                                * * * * *



JOHN CALCOTT,


                    (_From Grieves’_, _Bond Street_,)

                           BOOT AND SHOE MAKER,

                           No. 4, HIGH STREET,
                               SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *

                      [Picture: Royal coat of arms]



SHREWSBURY ROYAL BATHS.
NEAR THE RAILWAY STATION.


                                * * * * *

                                                     W. EBREY, PROPRIETOR.

                                * * * * *



LEEDS HOUSE,


                           WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
                              WOOLLEN CLOTH
                              Establishment,
                              MARKET SQUARE,
                               SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *

                         J. A. MEARA, PROPRIETOR.

                                * * * * *

                       13, HIGH STREET, SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *



THOMAS ANDREW,
HOSIER, GLOVER, AND SHIRT MAKER.


                                * * * * *

                       BERLIN AND FANCY REPOSITORY.

                                * * * * *

        Agent to Messrs. H. J. & D. NICOLL, Regent Street, London.

                                * * * * *

                       41, HIGH STREET, SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *



CHARLES J. HANMER,
BOOT & SHOE MANUFACTURER.


                                * * * * *

        A large assortment of Ladies’, Gentlemen’s, and Children’s
                Boots and Shoes on Sale, for ready money.

              _Agent to the Plate Glass Assurance Company_.

                                * * * * *

                      [Picture: Royal coat of arms]



SHROPSHIRE HAT MANUFACTORY,


                         _Wholesale and Retail_,
                      TOP OF PRIDE HILL, SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *

                    Craston and Co.’s Celebrated Hats,
             Manufactured upon the most improved principles.

                                * * * * *

The great and increasing demand for these Hats, afford real and
unmistaken proof of their superiority.  Encouraged by this proof of
public favour, we shall proceed with the improving spirit of the age in
carrying out, in all its integrity, that mode of business which we have
so successfully originated in the County of Salop.

Hats made to order on the shortest notice from 3¼ oz. by the most
experienced workmen.

   _Cloth and Travelling Caps_, _Hat Cases_, _Carpet Bags_, _&c._ _&c._

                                * * * * *



[Picture: Coat of Arms, Honi Soit Mal y Pense] ROYAL
SHREWSBURY CAKES.


                                * * * * *

                              VINCENT CRUMP,
                       (_By Special Appointment_,)
                               CONFECTIONER
                                    TO
                   HER MOST GRACIOUS MAJESTY THE QUEEN,
                         WYLE COP AND PRIDE HILL,
                               SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *



THE CELEBRATED SHREWSBURY CAKES,


    “Whose honour’d name the inventive city owns,
    Rendering through Britain’s isle Salopia’s praises known.”

                          _Are Manufactured by_
                              DANIEL DAVIES,
                    CONFECTIONER AND BRIDE CAKE MAKER,
     _Castle Gates_, _adjoining the Entrance to the Railway Station_,
                              _Shrewsbury_.
                            RICH BRIDE CAKES,
        Always on hand, or made to order, at the shortest notice.

                                * * * * *



MR. THOMAS EDWARDS,


                    Auctioneer, Appraiser, and Valuer,

                         MARDOL HEAD, SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *



MR. C. J. ARBLASTER,


                      Dispensing and Family Chemist,
                        CASTLE STREET, SHREWSBURY,

          (_Within two minutes walk from the Railway Station_.)

                                * * * * *



EDWARD EDWARDS,
HOSIER,
Haberdasher, and General Small Ware Dealer,


                         58, MARDOL, SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *

                  _Crochet Cotton_, _and Berlin Wools_.

                                * * * * *



CHARLES SAXELBY,
Tailor, Trouser and Breeches’
MAKER,
CASTLE STREET, SHREWSBURY.


                                * * * * *

       _Ladies’ and Gentlemen’s Waterproof Tweed Cloaks and Coats_.

                                * * * * *



MRS. LONGMORE,
BAZAAR & FANCY REPOSITORY,
18, HIGH STREET,
SHREWSBURY.


                                * * * * *



TIMOTHY POWELL,
BAKER AND CONFECTIONER,
58, MARDOL, SHREWSBURY.

Rich Bride        1s. 8d. per lb.   Dover Cakes       0s. 8d. per lb.
Cakes
Fruit Cakes       0s. 8d. „         Rich Citron       1s. 4d. „
                                    ditto

  Fancy Biscuits of every description 6d. to 2s. per lb.

  A great variety of Confectionery, 1s. to 3s. 6d. „

  Genuine Shrewsbury Cakes ... 1s. 8d. per box.

                _Orders executed at the shortest notice_.

                                * * * * *



MRS.  HORTON’S
Millinery and Baby Linen
ESTABLISHMENT,
19, HIGH STREET, SHREWSBURY.


                                * * * * *

                      [Picture: Royal coat of arms]



REDMAYNE AND CO.


                        MARKET SQUARE, SHREWSBURY,

                          Silk Mercers and Linen

                                 DRAPERS.

                                 ALSO AT
                20, NEW BOND STREET, LONDON, & HARROWGATE.
                           Funerals Furnished.

                                * * * * *



R. DODSON’S
STATUARY, MASONRY,


                                   AND
                         GENERAL BUILDING WORKS,
                     ST. MARY’S PLACE, CASTLE STREET,
                               SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *

                              THE SHOW ROOMS
                            CONTAIN UPWARDS OF
               One Hundred Marble and Stone Chimney Pieces,
                      Monuments, Tombs, Head Stones,
                     FONTS, FOUNTAINS, VASES, &c. &c.
                   _Designs forwarded for inspection_.

                                * * * * *



J. HANNY,
CLOCK AND WATCH MAKER,


                         OPPOSITE THE LION HOTEL,
                          WYLE COP, SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *

             CLOCKS AND WATCHES of every description, made or
     obtained to older, cleaned and repaired, on the shortest notice.

                      CHURCH, TURRET, & HOUSE CLOCKS
                KEPT IN A GOOD GOING STATE, AT PER ANNUM.

                                * * * * *

                           GOLD WEDDING RINGS.

                                * * * * *



R. STEPHENS,


                       BOOT AND SHOE ESTABLISHMENT,
                         MARDOL HEAD, SHREWSBURY.

         Register Office for Families and Servants, conducted by
                 Mrs. STEPHENS, Mardol Head, Shrewsbury.

                                AGENT FOR
                    THE TIMES FIRE ASSURANCE COMPANY.
            _Plate and other Glass Insured against Breakage_.

                                * * * * *



E. ROBERTS,


                            TAILOR AND DRAPER,
                          SHOPLATCH, SHREWSBURY,
                        OPPOSITE THE GEORGE HOTEL.

                                * * * * *



JOHN MORGAN,


                              MARKET STREET,
                               SHREWSBURY,

                     Guano, Seed, and Coal Merchant,
                                AGENT FOR
                  LAWES’ PATENT SUPER-PHOSPHATE OF LIME,
                   DEALER IN LIME, SALT, LINSEED CAKE,
                  _BANGOR SLATE_, _BROSELY TILE_, _&c._

                                 DEPÔTS,
           Shrewsbury and Chester Railway Stations, Salop, and
           the Stations on the Shrewsbury and Hereford Railway.

                                * * * * *



F. H. WORTH,


                       (FORMERLY ACTON AND WORTH,)

                              COACH BUILDER,
                    OPPOSITE WELSH BRIDGE, SHREWSBURY.
                                HERALDRY,
                         HATCHMENTS AND BANNERS.
                      COACH AND ORNAMENTAL PAINTER.

                                * * * * *

      In one handsome volume, 8vo. with nineteen Plates, cloth, 8s.



A FLORA
OF
SHROPSHIRE,


                By the Rev. W. A. LEIGHTON, B.A., F.B.S.E.

We cannot too strongly recommend it to the notice of our readers.  For
though as a local Flora, it professes to treat only of the plants of a
single county, that county produces more than half the number of species
of flowering plants indigenous to the Kingdom.  The descriptions are
unusually full and carefully drawn up.  We have good ground for saying
that the Flora of Shropshire should be in the hands of every one who
feels interested in the botanical productions of the British
Isles.—_Phytologist_.

We look upon the appearance of this work as being a great step in advance
in the progress of British indigenous botany—for although it is
professedly confined to the description of the plants of a single county,
yet as clearly shewing the incorrectness of the idea “that a New Flora in
the true sense or the term has become impossible,”—it is indispensable to
every botanist who desires to obtain a thorough knowledge of our native
plants.—_Jardine’s Annals of Natural History_.

Highly interesting work.  The “Index to the Localities,” where each plant
may be found in Shropshire, is very elaborate.—_Shrewsbury Chronicle_.

We were struck with the very correct manner in which he (Mr. Leighton)
has systematically arranged, the perspicuous accuracy with which he has
described, and the discriminating tact with which he has distinguished
all and every of our Salopian flowering herbs and trees; the whole
interspersed frequently with their medicinal and chemical powers, ancient
and modern customs, local anecdotes, scraps of poetry and fanciful
illustrations.  Works of this kind, though learned, are too often dry and
monotonous; but as regards this, we may truly say to the
botanist—_indocti discant_, _et ament meminisse periti_; and we may
assure general readers of every description, particularly those of
Shropshire, that, though lacking nothing of learning or science, Mr.
Leighton has, with much taste and fancy, contrived to make his Flora “a
perpetual flow of nectar’d sweets, where no crude surfeit
reigns.”—_News_.

Carefully and critically executed.—_Athenæum_.

                                * * * * *

Shrewsbury: JOHN DAVIES 15, High Street.  London: W. Pamplin, 45, Frith
Street, Soho Square.

                                * * * * *



OBSERVE!—WATERLOO HOUSE,
THE CHEAPEST HOUSE
FOR WOOLLEN CLOTHS, CLOTHING, AND HATS.


                                * * * * *

    [Picture: Man holding hat] HENRY HOWELL,[Picture: Man holding hat]

                               HIGH STREET,
                               SHREWSBURY,

BEGS to offer every description of CLOTHING, from the most costly and
Fashionable to the humblest attire of the Artizan.

The Prices of this Establishment, it must be particularly noted, are
Forty per Cent.  Lower than at any other House in this part of England,
because the Proprietor “SELLS ALL HIS GOODS AT THE LOWEST PROFITS FOR
CASH ONLY,” as the following prices will show

                                         £.      s.      d.
New Cape or Overcoat from                 0      12       6
The Albert Coat, in Black Cloth           1       1       0
Dress and Frock ditto                     1       1       0
The Paletot, a Gentlemanly Coat           1       8       0
Autumn and Winter Trousers                0      10       6
Ditto in plain and fancy Doeskins         0      10       6
Fancy Silk.  Satin and Cloth Vests        0       5       6
Shooting Coats in great variety           0      12       6
Over Coats, lined with Wool, from         0      15       0

                 A SUIT OF MOURNING COMPLETE FOR £1. 15s.
            _Boys’ and Youths’ Clothing of every description_.

        HATS!            [Picture: Picture of           HATS!
                               top hat]
  _A Good Silk Hat_,                               _French Velvet_,
     3_s._ 6_d._                                     _Nap Hats_,
French Hats, for Boys                             _from_ 5_s._ 6_d._
 and Youths, for 4s.                              Military and Cloth
         6d.                                             Caps
 usually sold for 6s.                              1s. to 2s. each.

              FANCY NECKERCHIEFS, TIES, COLLARS, BRACES, &c.

        _Agent for Macintosh’s Waterproof Garments_, _and the New_
                      _Patent Lever Buckle Braces_.

        Observe the Address—H. HOWELL’S Outfitting Establishment,
         No. 24, High Street, Opposite the Old Bank, Shrewsbury.

                                * * * * *



RICHARD MARSTON,
GLASS, CHINA, & EARTHENWARE
Warehouse,
MARKET STREET, SHREWSBURY.


                                * * * * *

                   A LARGE ASSORTMENT OF GLASS SHADES.

                   ORDERS EXECUTED AND ARTICLES MATCHED

                _With the greatest possible promptitude_.

                              AGENT FOR THE
       United Kingdom Temperance and General Provident Institution,
                       39, Moorgate Street, London.

                                * * * * *



LONDON HAT WAREHOUSE.


                                * * * * *

                             J. G. SAUNDERS,
                            (_Late Wilding_,)
                       33, HIGH STREET, SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *



Samuel Butler, D.D. Bp. of Lichfield.


                                * * * * *

PORTRAIT OF THE RIGHT REVEREND SAMUEL BUTLER, D.D. [late] Lord Bishop of
Lichfield, Painted by Thomas Phillips, R.A., Engraved by S. Cousins,
A.R.A.

                                                _£_    _s._    _d._
Prints, (Published at 1 1 0)                      0       5       0
Proofs, (Published at 2 2 0)                      0      10       0
Proofs before Letters, (Published at 3 3 0)       0      15       0
Proofs with Autograph, (Published at 3 3 0)       0      15       0

                Shrewsbury: JOHN DAVIES, 15, High Street.

                                * * * * *



JAMES PHILLIPS,


                             TAILOR AND HABIT
                                  Maker,
                             37, HIGH STREET,
                               SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *

             Maker of the Ladies’ Waterproof Tweed Cloaks and
                             Riding Jackets.

                                * * * * *

                     No. 10, HIGH STREET, SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *



EDWARD LEE,
FURNISHING IRONMONGER, CUTLER, &c.


                                * * * * *

                   BAR IRON, NAILS, OILS, COLOURS, &c.

                                * * * * *



Just Published, Price 6d.


              A Plan of the Town and Suburbs of Shrewsbury,
                      corrected to the present time.

                Published by JOHN DAVIES, 15, High Street.
                         Sold by all Booksellers.

                                * * * * *

                      In a wrapper, 4to.  Price 2s.



Twenty-one Views in Shrewsbury.


                 Shrewsbury: JOHN DAVIES 15, High Street.

                                * * * * *



DAVID DAVIES,
COACH BUILDER,
AND
Designer,


                           ST. JULIAN’S FRIARS,
                               SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *



HENRY SHAW,
FISHING TACKLE MANUFACTURER,
AND ORNITHOLOGIST,


                         HIGH STREET, SHREWSBURY.
                  ESTABLISHED UPWARDS OF HALF A CENTURY.

                                * * * * *



B. EVANS,
Confectioner, Fancy Bread and Biscuit-Baker,
HIGH STREET, SHREWSBURY.


                                * * * * *

Rich Bride, Citron, Rout, Dessert, Plain and Ornamental Cakes.  Captains,
Bath, Sponge, Savoy, French and Baby Biscuits, Best Gingerbread, Hunting
Nuts, and Pastry of all kinds.  Shrewsbury Cakes and Funeral Biscuits
made to order at the shortest notice.

                                * * * * *



JAMES ICKE,


                      WHOLESALE, FAMILY, AND RETAIL

                          Grocer and Tea Dealer,

                       _Opposite the Post Office_,

                              MARKET STREET,

                         _And Two Doors from the_

                        BUTTER CROSS, PRIDE HILL,
                               SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *

                 BISCUITS, PICKLES, FISH SAUCES, &c. &c.
                                    AT
                            WHOLESALE PRICES.

                                * * * * *



CLASS V. PARIS INDUSTRIAL EXHIBITION.


                                * * * * *

                            WILLIAM D. JONES,
                        Hunting, Racing, & Steeple
                              Chase Saddler,
                      HARNESS AND CAP MANUFACTURER,
                               SHREWSBURY.

                                   —o—

        Hunting Horns and Caps, Racing Jackets and Caps, Greyhound
      Clothing; Retriever Starters, Universal Game Carriers, &c. &c.

                              SOLE MAKES OF
                   THE IMPROVED PATENT GREYHOUND SLIPS:

    _One trial will prove their decided superiority over all others_.

      Trunks, Portmanteaus, Carpet and Enamelled Leather Travelling
           Bags; Ladies’ Travelling Cases; Letter Bags, &c. &c.

                                * * * * *

The London _Morning Post_ thus speaks of the Race Saddle now at the Paris
Exhibition, made by the Advertiser:—

    “Foremost in the list of exhibitors for beautiful workmanship stands
    the name of Mr. W. D. Jones, of Shrewsbury.  This gentleman shows a
    very elegant racing saddle, designed and manufactured by himself, and
    exhibited for its extreme lightness, its comfort combined with
    elegance of shape, and the novelty of its embellishments.  The saddle
    is little if anything more than 2lbs. in weight, though, of course,
    that can always be increased to please the customer; it is
    sufficiently long in the seat to give the greatest ease to the rider,
    and it is embellished with bunches of roses, thistles, and shamrocks,
    interwoven with oak foliage and acorns—the whole of the ornamentation
    being executed in relief by hand labour only.  The case containing
    this beautiful saddle is always surrounded by large numbers of the
    higher class of visitors to the Exhibition, to whom it appears to
    give universal satisfaction.  Mr. Jones was an exhibitor in Hyde Park
    of the Royal Albert Shot Belt, which is very highly approved and
    extensively used by those who take a delight in the sports of the
    field.”

                                * * * * *



The Antiquities of Shropshire,


       Drawn and etched by W. Pearson, _forty-one plates_, 4to. 6s.

Gateway in Waterlane,   Battlefield Church      Middle Castle
Shrewsbury
                        The Roman Wall at       Red Castle at
Shrewsbury              Wroxeter                Hawkestone

Shrewsbury Castle       Buildwas Abbey          Lilleshull Abbey

The Old Welsh Bridge,   Buildwas Abbey, 2nd     Lilleshull Abbey.
Shrewsbury              View                    2nd

The Abbey Church,       Wenlock Monastery       Clungunford Church
Shrewsbury                                      Old Church,
                        Wenlock Monastery,      Wellington &
Oratory, in the Abbey   Bridgnorth, 2nd View    Uffington Church (on
Garden, Shrewsbury                              one Plate)
                        The Hanging Tower,
St. Giles’s Church,     Bridgnorth              Acton Burnell Castle
Shrewsbury
                        Ludlow Castle           Interior of Acton
Porch of St. Mary’s                             Burnell Castle
Church, Shrewsbury      Ludlow Castle.  2nd
                        View                    Acton Burnell Church
Franciscan, or Gray
Friars, Shrewsbury      Ludlow Castle, 3rd      Hales Owen Abbey
                        Do.
Upton Magna Church                              St. Kenelm’s Chapel
                        Bromfield Priory
Haughmond Abbey                                 Moreton Corbet Castle
                        Hopton Castle
Chapter House,                                  Moreton Corbet
Haughmond Abbey         Hopton Castle.  2nd     Castle, 2nd View
                        View
                                                Millichope Hall
                        Stoke Castle

                        Clun Castle

          Published by JOHN DAVIES, 15, High Street, Shrewsbury.

                                * * * * *



HENRY URWICK,
ALBION INN,
NEAR THE RAILWAY STATION,
Castle Foregate, Shrewsbury.


                                * * * * *



C. PHILPOTT,


                      Family Tea Dealer, Grocer, &c.
                               PRIDE HILL,
                               SHREWSBURY.

                                * * * * *



FOURTH EDITION, with SIXTY-ONE Engravings on Wood, Price 1s.


                                 A GUIDE,
                       DESCRIPTIVE AND HISTORICAL,
                               THROUGH THE
                           TOWN OF SHREWSBURY,
               INTERSPERSED WITH BRIEF NOTICES OF THE MORE
                   REMARKABLE OBJECTS IN THE ENVIRONS,

                     TO WHICH ARE APPENDED, LISTS OF
                     THE EMINENT NATIVES OF THE TOWN,
                  WITH REFERENCES TO BIOGRAPHICAL WORKS;

                                    OF
                   THE BIRDS SEEN IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD;

                                  AND OF
                       THE RARER SPECIES OF PLANTS
                       INDIGENOUS TO THE VICINITY.

                                  BY THE
                   REV. W. A. LEIGHTON, B.A.  F.B S.E.
                  AUTHOR OF “A FLORA OF SHROPSHIRE,” &c.

    “I held on way to auncient Shrewsebrie towne,
    And so from horse at lodging lighting downe,
    I walkt the streats, and markt what came to vewe.”

                                                               CHURCHYARD.

                                * * * * *

                           NOTICES OF THE WORK.

    “We are exceedingly pleased with this elegant and judicious Guide.
    We think it is formed after the best plan, that of pure and terse
    description of those objects which are actually presented to the eyes
    of the stranger, neither overloaded with history and biography, which
    he may study more appropriately in other works, and on less hurried
    occasions, nor degraded by the introduction of mean and insignificant
    subjects.  To the residents of Shrewsbury, the utility of this little
    volume is enhanced by a catalogue of its eminent natives, and lists
    of native birds and plants.  The whole work bears evidence of the
    ability and good taste of the author.

    “We must particularly praise the pains taken to give a full account
    of the Grammar School, and its eminent scholars, who, under the
    conduct of the late and present head masters, (the late Bishop of
    Lichfield and Dr. Kennedy), have won an extraordinary proportion of
    the prizes at both universities, as is shewn in the highly honourable
    lists here printed.  The volume is embellished with no less than
    sixty engravings on wood.”

                                                   _Gentleman’s Magazine_.

    “This ‘Guide through the Town of Shrewsbury’ is, in every particular,
    a well-arranged, comprehensive, correct, and intelligent book of
    reference.

    “There is no town in England better known by name than
    Shrewsbury—from its cakes and annual show, to its famed Grammar
    School and useful Institutions; but this Guide will make both natives
    and strangers better acquainted with its antiquity, its internal
    regulations, and the character of its inhabitants, than could have
    been derived from any previous publication of the kind.  It goes so
    minutely into particulars, traces sources with so much industry and
    accuracy, and details events with so much vividness and perspicuity,
    that it should be called a miniature History of Shrewsbury.” . . .
    _Analyst_.

    “It really is one proof, and that not the least remarkable, of the
    rapid improvement of provincial literature within the past fifteen
    years, that the standard of guide-books is of a far higher degree of
    excellence than formerly was the case.  THIS _Guide to Shrewsbury_ is
    neatly written, abounds with every species of information,
    historical, descriptive, and other, which relates to the subjects
    noticed, is profusely illustrated with wood-cuts, and lastly, has
    appended to it what is of much value to works of this kind a _Flora_
    and _Fauna_ of the neighbourhood.  As a specimen of country printing,
    the book is remarkable; it might have passed for the work of a
    VIZETELLY or BRADBURY.”—_Critic_.

    “A pleasing little volume, not more remarkable for the neat and
    workmanlike manner in which it is ‘got-up,’ than for the simple and
    unaffected style in which it is written.”—_Manchester Chronicle_.

    “An excellent Guide to this interesting old town, its antiquities,
    curiosities, surrounding scenery, botany, and, in short, all that an
    inquiring tourist could wish to inspect in a visit to
    Shrewsbury.”—_Literary Gazette_.

    “It will be found to be an admirable companion to the antiquities and
    other noticeable points of the place; and when the visitors leave the
    old town this guide will call to mind its outward forms and
    semblances.  This book has much more permanent value than guide-books
    usually have.  Would that books of greater pretensions were always as
    complete!”—_Pictorial Times_.

    “Made memorable by the pen of the inimitable bard in his play of
    _Henry IV._, the town of Shrewsbury naturally becomes an object of
    curiosity to the reader of Shakspere.  Excited by this feeling, we
    took up this little volume, and we were so well pleased with it that
    we step aside from our usual course of passing by publications of a
    local character to notice its excellence.  It is tastefully and
    correctly printed, amply illustrated with numerous and beautiful wood
    engravings, and its descriptions graphic and clear, so as to render
    it a pleasing and unerring guide to the visitor of Shrewsbury,
    instructive to the historical and architectural antiquarian, the
    traveller, and the general reader.

    “We recommend it to all whom business or pleasure may call to that
    ancient and celebrated town.”—_Liverpool Chronicle_.

          Shrewsbury: Published by JOHN DAVIES, 15, High Street.
                         Sold by all Booksellers.

                                * * * * *



THOMAS PHILPOTT,
UNICORN INN, WYLE COP,
SHREWSBURY.


                                * * * * *

                   EVERY ACCOMMODATION FOR TRAVELLERS.

                 _Wines and Spirits of the best quality_.

                                * * * * *



ENGLISH BRIDGE, SHREWSBURY.


                                * * * * *

                               T. FIRMSTON,
                                 BUILDER,

Has constantly on Sale all the sizes and varieties of the Celebrated
Llwynenion Pipes, Junctions, Bends, &c. for Sanitary and ordinary
Drainage; the whole being of the best construction, and admirably glazed.

                                * * * * *



Silk Mercery, and General Drapery Establishment.


                         [Picture: Silk Mercery]

            Warwick House, 26 and 27, High Street, Shrewsbury.

                          MACGEAGH AND FIELDING,
                    Silk Mercers and General Drapers,

Beg to call the attention of the inhabitants of Shrewsbury, its vicinity,
                              and the public
                           generally, to their

                         LARGE AND VARIED STOCK,

  combining, as it does, every Novelty in Dress, as well as every thing
                          plain and substantial
           for family use, and all on the most moderate terms.

                                * * * * *

                  THE SHREWSBURY WATERPROOF TWEED CLOAKS
                        MAY BE HAD OF THE MAKERS,
                MACGEAGH & FIELDING, WARWICK HOUSE, SALOP.

                                * * * * *



PUBLICATIONS RELATING TO SHROPSHIRE, &c.


SALOPIA AND OTHER POEMS, by J. W. Bythell, Esq. sm. 8vo. _cloth_, 2s. 6d.

HISTORY, GAZETTEER AND DIRECTORY OF SHROPSHIRE, _with a large coloured
Map of the County_, 9s.

PEARSON’S ANTIQUITIES OF SHROPSHIRE, in Forty-three Etchings, _in a
wrapper_, 6s.

LEIGHTON’S FLORA OF SHROPSHIRE, 8vo. 8s.

ORDNANCE MAP OF THE COUNTY OF SALOP _mounted on Canvas and Case_,

WALKER’S DITTO DITTO, 2s. 6d.

COLLINS’S DITTO, _in paper cover_, 6d.

TWENTY-ONE VIEWS IN SHREWSBURY, _in a wrapper_, 2s.

PLAN OF THE TOWN OF SHREWSBURY, brought down to the present time, 6d.

PORTRAIT OF THE LADY HARRIET CLIVE, Painted by Sir T. Lawrence, P.R.A.
Engraved by S. Cousins, A.R.A.

PORTRAIT OF THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD VISCOUNT HILL, Lord Lieutenant
of the County of Salop, Painted by Francis Grant, A.R.A., Engraved by J.
Thompson, Prints £2 2s.  Proofs, £4 4s.

PORTRAIT OF THE LATE LORD VISCOUNT HILL, C.B., G.C.H., &c.  Proofs, 10s.
6d.  Prints 7s. 6d.

PORTRAITS OF THE LATE RIGHT HONOURABLE EDWARD HERBERT, EARL OF POWIS,
K.G., Lord-Lieutenant of the County of Montgomery, Painted by F. Grant,
Engraved by H. Cousins, £1 1s.

MONUMENTAL EFFIGY OF THE LATE RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF POWIS, K.G. erected
in St. Mary’s Church, Welshpool; and EFFIGIAL MEMORIAL of ditto, erected
in the same church, drawn on Stone by the Sculptor, E. Richardson, Esq.
plain 5s. tinted 7s. 6d. each.

PORTRAIT OF THE HONOURABLE THOMAS KENYON, Painted by Pardon, Engraved by
Lupton, 10s.

PORTRAIT OF JOHN MYTTON, ESQ. OF HALSTON, Painted by Webb, Engraved by
Giller, India Proof, £1s. 1s.

PORTRAIT OF THE RIGHT REV. SAMUEL BUTLER D.D. late Lord Bishop of
Lichfield. Painted by Thomas Phillips, R.A.  Engraved by S. Cousins,
A.R.A.  Prints, 5s.  Proofs 10s.  Proofs, 10s.   Proofs, with Autograph,
15s.  Ditto before letters 15s.

RAILWAY STATION, SHREWSBURY, From a Drawing by T. N. Henshaw, Esq.  2s.
6d.

VIEW OF ELLESMERE CHURCH, Drawn on Stone by Hawkins, 3s. 6d.

VIEW OF THE ABBEY CHURCH, SHREWSBURY, in tinted Lithography, by Hyde, 1s.

          On Sale at JOHN DAVIES’S, 15, High Street, Shrewsbury.




FOOTNOTES.


{i}  In the original the list of streets is on front inside cover: it has
been moved to the end in this transcription to make the start easier to
follow.—DP.

{2}  The population of the Borough is 19,681; that of the Registrar’s
District 23,104.  There are 13 Churches, affording 9,618 “sittings;” and
25 Dissenters’ Meeting Houses, with 5,805 “sittings.”  The numbers of
attendants, March 30, 1851, including Sunday Scholars, were at the
Churches, in the morning, 6,080; afternoon, 3,135; and evening, 2,853;
and at the Dissenters’ Meeting Houses,—morning, 2,089; afternoon, 398;
evening, 2,232.

{3}  We would refer the visitor, who may be desirous of acquainting
himself with our local history, to the inestimable History of Shrewsbury
by Owen and Blakeway, 2 vols. 4to; a work of high historic authority, and
abounding with deep and true antiquarian research.  From this valuable
publication we have condensed our accounts of the ecclesiastical
structures of the place.

{20}  The Council usually sat in Ludlow Castle, but for the greater
dispatch of business occasionally assembled at Shrewsbury, Bewdley, and
Hereford.

{21}  The chimney piece of the Great Chamber is now, it is believed,
preserved in Condover Hall, near this town.  Its sculpture consists of
Adam and Eve amid the trees of Paradise.

{53}  Should the visitor feel disposed to prolong his walk in this
direction, he will find himself amply compensated by the enjoyment of an
extensive prospect of the town, and the windings of the Severn, amid the
romantic and richly wooded banks of Shelton and Berwick.

A few minutes’ stroll along the turnpike road, beautifully shaded by
overhanging beech trees, will also bring him to the magnificent iron
gates which afford entrance to the delightful grounds of Berwick,
abounding in trees of great size and beauty.  The Mansion-House, the seat
of the Honourable Wentworth Powys, soon presents itself; and at a short
distance, embosomed in trees, stands the small, but picturesque CHAPEL,
erected in 1672, on the site of an ancient ruinous structure, and
appropriated to the use of the inmates of the adjacent Hospital for
decayed housekeepers, erected and endowed at the above period by Sir
Samuel Jones, Knt. the then possessor of the Berwick estates.

                          [Picture: The Chapel]

To the lover of sylvan scenery, the neighbouring woods of Almond Park and
the picturesque and woody declivities of Leaton Shelf, will afford a rich
treat; and the experienced botanist will find in them many rare and
beautiful species of brambles, and other floral treasures, well worthy
his careful investigation.

{56}  The turnpike road in this direction will conduct the stranger to
Battlefield, “the royal field of Shrewsbury,” the site of the important
Battle of Shrewsbury, fought on 20th July, 1403:—

                “the bloody rout that gave
    To Harry’s brow a wreath,—to Hotspur’s heart a grave.”

To detail the events of this direful contest would far exceed our
prescribed limits, and we must, therefore, content ourselves by referring
our readers to works of a higher order:—

    “Trace, Visitor, the tale as beats thy vein,
    Clad in cold-hearted History’s homely weeds,
    Or garlanded with Avon’s dewy flowers.”

                      [Picture: Battlefield Church]

The spot, where it is said the bodies of the slain were interred, is now
covered by a church, once collegiate, founded by Henry IV., in gratitude
for his victory.  It contains a handsome monument, in the florid Gothic
style, to the memory of the late John Corbet, Esq. of Sundorne.  A short
walk over the adjacent fields brings us to the splendid Gothic mansion of
Sundorne, the seat of A. W. Corbet, Esq.  In the Library and Drawing-room
are several fine and valuable paintings by Titian, Salvator Rosa,
Rembrandt, Guido, Raphael, Rubens, Wouvermans, and Van Huysum.  Within
the grounds, midway of Haughmond’s “bosky hill,” are the venerable ruins
of HAUGHMOND ABBEY, rich in many a curious remain of early architecture.
One peculiar feature of the earlier portions of this Abbey, which merits
the attention of the architectural antiquary, is, that whilst the round
or Norman arch is used, the mouldings and pillars belong to the Early
English era:—a singular and uncommon instance of transition in style.

Tradition points out a knoll, planted with a clump of fir trees, called
the Queen’s Bower, where Eleanor, the Queen of Henry IV. received the
news of the victory at Battlefield.  Her Majesty hearing the tidings of
the messenger imperfectly, is said to have exclaimed “hey man,” from
whence the hill subsequently acquired its name.  A more probable
derivation of the name is “Haut mont,” the High Mount.  From these crags
“that sprightly Scot of Scots, Douglas,” in endeavouring to escape after
the battle, is said to have fallen, and sustaining considerable injury,
was captured by his pursuers.  The noble view from these heights cannot
fail to rivet the attention.

{67}  See first page.

{71}  See Initial, page 1, for that on the south side.

{86}  Those who may feel interested in tracing the rise and progress of
this Institution will do well to consult “Records of the Salop Infirmary,
by Henry Bevan, 4to. 1847,” a work of great accuracy and pains-taking,
and especially deserving of praise for its valuable statistical tables.

{97}  Engravings of the Old Church will be found in the Gentleman’s
Magazine, vol. 81, p. 9, (N. E. view,) and vol. 66, p. 369, (E. end.)

{109}  See a north-west view of this once fine old Church in the
Gentleman’s Magazine, vol. 77, p. 297.

{126}  At this Parliament, held Sept. 30th, the patriotic and unhappy
David, the last Prince of Wales, was tried, and condemned to an
ignominious and cruel death, which, to the disgrace of Edward, was
permitted to be carried into execution.  To this convention two knights
were summoned from each county, and two deputies from certain of the
principal cities and towns, (of which Shrewsbury was one,) and thus was
laid the foundation of the British House of Commons.  After the trial of
David the Parliament adjourned to Acton Burnell, where the famous statute
of that name received the royal assent.

{127}  Henry VIII. had previously by an Act of the twenty-sixth year of
his reign appointed twenty-six suffragan or assistant bishops, to whom he
assigned twenty-six borough towns dispersed over the kingdom as their
sees.  Shrewsbury was judiciously selected as one.  This useful law was
however seldom enforced, one only suffragan Bishop of Shrewsbury being
known; Lewis Thomas, late Abbot of Cwmhîr, consecrated suffragan Bishop
of the see of Salop by Archbishop Cranmer, 24th June, 1537.  He died 1560
or 1561.

{133}  The engraving represents the eastern end previous to the
alterations.

{153}  A short walk along the retired and shady lane opposite St. Giles’s
church brings us to a small but highly picturesque wood, covering the
ragged bank of the Meole Brook; embosomed in which is Sutton Spa, the
water of which has been found by experience to be highly serviceable in
scrofulous disorders.  The attendant resides on the spot, in a neat
cottage, near to which are hot and cold baths, with suitable
accommodations.

{154}  Continuing our walk for three miles along the London-road, we
arrive at the little village of Atcham, with its picturesque church on
the margin of the Severn, which river is here crossed by an elegant stone
bridge, designed by the architect Gwyn.

The village of Atcham is memorable as the birth-place of Ordericus
Vitalis, one of the best of our earliest Historians, who was born 16th
February, 1075.

Within sight of the village, on the confluence of the rivers Tern and
Severn, is the noble edifice of Attingham Hall, the seat of the Right
Honourable Lord Berwick, built from designs by the celebrated Athenian
Stuart.  The mansion consists of a centre and two wings, connected by
corridors, and is adorned by a handsome tetrastyle portico of the
composite order.

[Picture: Tomb of Confessor Burton] Close adjoining, amid the beautiful
woods and plantations on the banks of the Severn, is the fine Gothic
mansion of Longner, the residence of Robert Burton, Esq.  In the Garden
is preserved, with sacred care, the ALTAR-TOMB of one of the ancestors of
the Burton family, known as the “_Confessor Burton_,” who died suddenly
for joy on the restoration of the Reformed Religion on the accession of
Elizabeth, and whose corpse being refused burial in the family vault in
St. Chad’s, the parish church, by the Romish clergyman who then
officiated there, was carried back and interred in this spot by his
family.

[Picture: Portion of Roman City Wall] About a mile from Atcham is the
Roman station of Uriconium, or Wroxeter.  A PORTION OF THE CITY WALL is
still standing, and the foundations of the boundary walls of the whole
place may be traced with tolerable accuracy in the adjoining fields.
Many sepulchral inscribed stones, altars, pavements, coins, fibulæ,
vases, &c. have at various times been ploughed up by the inhabitants.
The church is well deserving of notice: and in the walls of the chancel
may be seen curious remains of early Anglo-Norman arches.  The interior
contains the fine altar-tomb, with cumbent effigies, of Sir Thomas
Bromley, Lord Chief Justice of England, one of the Executors of Henry
VIII.  There are also monuments to the Barkers of Haughmond; Sir Richard
Newport, ancestor of the Earls of Bradford; Francis, first Earl of
Bradford, and several others of the Newport family.  From the village a
fine prospect of the adjacent Wrekin is obtained.

{157}  Continuing our walk we speedily reach the peaceful and sequestered
village of Meole Brace, celebrated for its excellent trout stream, on the
banks of which was born and educated Thomas Barker, from whom honest
Izaak Walton, in his delightful book, “The Complete Angler,” acknowledges
that he derived the greater portion of his information, relative to
fly-fishing.  Mr. Barker published in 1691 a work entitled “Barker’s
Delight, or the Art of Angling,” which ran through three editions in the
space of eight years, and which is still in much repute among the lovers
of the “gentle art.”  Near the Bridge are Evans’s Alms-houses, built in
1844, under the will of the late Mr. John Evans of this town, for nine
poor widows, who each have a liberal yearly allowance.

                       [Picture: Meole Bridge, &c.]

At the distance of a mile from Meole are the Sharpstones Hill and Bomere
Pool, noted for their lovely scenery, and as the habitats of many of the
rarer species of plants indigenous to the vicinity.

{176}  At a distance of two miles on the Holyhead road stands Shelton
Oak, which, according to tradition, “the irregular and wild Glendower”
ascended to reconnoitre the state of the contending armies on the
Battlefield; but finding that the king was making a powerful head, and
had “beat down young Harry Hotspur and his troops,” he precipitately
retreated with his army into Wales.  This majestic veteran of the forest,

          “Whose boughes are moss’d with age,
    And high top bald with dry antiquity,”

is completely hollow; many of the greater arms are dead, and the whole is
fast falling to decay.  Whatever be the degree of credit due to the
tradition, certain it is there is positive evidence in a paper dated
1543, preserved among the title deeds of the Waring family, that this
tree was esteemed a great one within 140 years of the Battle of
Shrewsbury, and an object of remark to old people long before.  The
following are the dimensions:—girt at bottom, close to the ground,
forty-four feet three inches; ditto, five feet from the ground,
twenty-five feet one inch; ditto, eight feet from the ground,
twenty-seven feet four inches; height to the top of the main trunk, or
principal bough, forty-one feet six inches.

                          [Picture: Shelton Oak]

A little beyond this, on the Welsh Pool road, is Christ Church, Oxon,
consecrated October 3rd, 1854, for a district comprising several outlying
portions of the Parishes of St. Chad and St. Julian.

Immediately opposite is the Lunatic Asylum for the Counties of Salop and
Montgomery, erected after a design by Messrs. Scott.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A GUIDE, DESCRIPTIVE AND HISTORICAL,
THROUGH THE TOWN OF SHREWSBURY***


******* This file should be named 62688-0.txt or 62688-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/2/6/8/62688


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

